                     T.R.l.           ADVISORY                      CIRCULAR                              No.

Issued in: February 2024                                                                              Serial No. 07/24


     PROTECTION OF TEA FROM RED RUST DISEASE IN THE LOW COUNTRY
      (This Advisory Circular supersedes the Advisory Circular DM 4 Serial No 13/03 issued in August 2003 and
                         related previous Advisory Circulars and links with Advisory Circular PU 2)



1.        Introduction
The Red Rust disease is caused by an alga Cephaleuros parasiticus Karst. Red Rust attacks both
young and mature teas in the low country up to an elevation of 600 m (2000 ft) amsl. Though this can
be encountered above 600 ft, it does not cause any economic damage. The disease is usually more
severe on teas that grow under sub optimal growing conditions. But occasionally vigorously growing,
high-yielding    tea cultivars too have      been   found   to be badly attacked.    Diseased    branches    have also
been seen on old seedling bushes              growing   in fields with a good cover of tea. On mature tea the
disease is particularly bad on the peripheral branches, which show marked chlorosis at certain times of
the year.

By and large, the main predisposing factor appears to be shallow, quartzy soil, often accompanied                    by
an underlying hard pan of kabook and gravel. The disease is also severe on tea growing on ill drained
and alkaline soils. A gradual neglect of cultivation practices is also responsible for disease outbreaks.
Frequent spells of drought predispose young tea to Red Rust, especially in the early years. Inadequate
or complete absence of shade is another factor favouring the disease.

2.        Symptoms       and Diagnosis
Red rust causes severe damage to young tea by attacking and killing stem tissues in patches. Affected
patches on the stem become most noticeable when the alga produces its fructifications, which appear
during the month of April to July on stems up to about two years of age. These patches appear brick-
red or orange in colour. The patches are oval to oblong in shape. During August to March, the lesions
appear purplish in colour; there are no fruiting hairs at this time, but longitudinal cracks may be seen
on the surface. Severely affected stems on weak bushes die back. The leaves produced above
affected regions show a characteristic variegation with yellow or white patches,                        which   mimics
discolourations caused by mutations that are more common at higher elevations.
The disease is also common           on the older leaves. Affected patches are usually circular and are usually
about 5-7 mm       in diameter. In some instances, they can be long and oval, running along the entire
length of the midrib. The damage caused to the plant by the leaf spots is negligible.

Infection takes place mostly during the fruiting period by means of spores, which are dispersed by wind
or rain. Repeated attacks gradually weaken the bush with a consequent reduction in crop. Bushes that
are severely attacked by Red Rust can be easily recognized by their scanty appearance. Such bushes
recover poorly after pruning.
3.        Management 01 Red Rust
3.1 Cultural Methods
As Red Rust is more often serious only on weak plants, strengthening the host by good agricultural
practices should help minimize the damage caused by the disease. This could be achieved by one or
more of the following approaches.

     a.     By improving soil condition: |! drainage is the main limiting factor, improve drainage to promote
            deeper rooting. |! the conditions are limited due to an underlying hard pan, deep forking will
          help breaking it for the deep penetration of roots. During dry weather, thatch             new clearings
          with suitable mulching materials such as loppings of Guatemala or Mana Grass.

     b.   By improving soil fertility: Soil fertility should   be improved   by addition of organic amendments
          and proper fertilizer applications.

3.2 Chemical Methods
Fungicidal spraying is recommended for Red Rust control. Copper fungicides have provided very good
results. For effective control, spray a fungicide as recommended in Advisory Circular PU2 about three
rounds during the year. It is suggested that for young tea, the first spray be applied in late April, the
second about four weeks later in May, and the third, in June. For good control, it is essential to wet the
green stems and the older wood with the spray solution, on which the alga is sporulating
For mature tea, the first spray application should be given soon after pruning, the second at tipping
and third about four weeks later. It is advisable to remove all the trailing peripheral branches during
pruning. Full benefits of spraying can be achieved only if spraying is continued for two to three
successive years.



Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka
Talawakelle

                                                     COPYRIGHT
All rights reserved.   No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,   recording, scanning or information storage and retrieval system|
without the prior written permission from the Director, Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka, Talawakelle
