                  T.R.l. ADVISORY CIRCULAR                                                       No.PM Pl

Issued in: February 2024                                                                 Serial No. 12/24


                         MANAGEMENT OF SHOT-HOLE BORER

(This Advisory Circular supersedes the Advisory Circular PM 2 with Serial No. 02/03 issued in February 2003
          and related previous Advisory Circulars and links with Advisory Circular PU 4 and PM 1)



1. Introduction


Shot-hole borer (SHB) (Xyleborus fornicatus Eichh.), synonym. Euwallacea fornicatus occurs in all
tea-planting regions in Sri Lanka and is one of the key insect pests in elevations between 150 m to
1500 m. However, it also appears in elevations outside this range as a pest.

Immature Tea: The main stems and main branches of immature tea are susceptible to SHB.
Protection of the main stem and main branches which give rise frame of the tea bush is vital.

Mature Tea: The immediate and direct damage that could result from heavy shot-hole borer
infestation is due to breakage of primary branches arising from prune cuts. In the case of a new
branch, after pruning, the basal section reaches the particular maturity that is preferred by the
borer from about the 12" - 14™ month. Such a branch generally remains susceptible to attack il
about 36 months depending on the growth of the branch. Therefore, this period of primary branch
susceptibility warrants protection from borer infestation.

Formation of Wood Rot: It is important to prevent wood-rot formation in the stems that have been
galleried by the borer. Microbial organisms that cause wood-rot enter through the unhealed gallery
openings as well as through the galleries exposed by pruning. Unless removed at the pruning time
such rotted wood can, in the long run, cause protracted debilitation of the bush frame resulting in
crop loss.

2. Integrated Management of Shot-hole Borer

The following Integrated Pest Management strategies can be adopted to overcome the shot-
hole borer damage.

2.1 Planting of Tolerant Cultivars to Shot-hole Borer

There is hardly any cultivar that is totally resistant to shot-hole borer. The mostly one can do is to
select cultivars that show tolerance to shot-hole borer and a high innate capacity for callusing.
Those that have shot-hole borer tolerance exhibit compensatory growth to a great extent. Those
with high callusing properties have the ability to heal the wounds faster than others. |! the wounds
heal fast, there is no opportunity for wood-rot organisms to act on the dead cells 01 the wounds.
However, both these factors (callusing and compensatory growth) can interrupt physiological
activity in the main stem and retard the growth of the plant

Refer to the Advisory Circular PN 1 to select tolerant cultivars appropriate to the region/s.

2.2 Field Planting of Shot-hole Borer Uninfested Nursery Plants

Shot-hole borer uninfested nursery plants should be used for field planting.
2.3 Sanitary Measures at Pruning

Prune-time sanitation measures should be adopted from the first proper pruning onwards to
minimize wood rot that 15 induced by borer galleries. The dead snags (dieback that has undergone
wood-rot) should be removed until healthy tissue underneath is exposed. Galleried parts of a
branch should be shaved away until a clean prune cut remains. The large prune cuts should be
painted with appropriate wound dressing/protective paint. Refer to the Advisory Circular PU 2.

2.4 Burying of Pruning

Burying of pruning besides its advantages of waste recycling and organic matter supply to tea
lands, will destroy residual populations of SHB in infested branches and thereby minimize the
chances of re-infestation

2.5 Maintain Bush Vigor to Encourage Growth Compensation

Good Agricultural Practices on crop and land management recommended by the Tea Research
Institute should be adopted.

2.6 Chemical Control

2.6.1 New Clearings: All new clearings located in areas prone to SHB infestation (mid-elevation)
should be annually treated with the recommended insecticides as a prophylactic measure in order
10 facilitate good frame development. Refer to the Advisory Circular PU 4 for recommended
chemicals, dosages, method of application and pre-harvesting intervals

Spraying is recommended in May/June in the north-east sector and in December /January in the
south west sector. A repeat application is necessary after 6 to 8 weeks in the field where the SHB
attack already been noticed.

2.6.2. Mature Tea: Only application of Lime-Sulphur is recommended to protect mature tea fields
from SHB attacks. Refer to the Advisory Circular PU 4

Time of spraying Lime-Sulphur for mature tea fields;

            Terunsd year                          “Spraying afer pruing                  Spraying after pruning
| Region      i(vear)                              (Year2)                               (vear3)
               S F maim]a]s                  :]65      [|                 |] !5!19[:[]9| [6] “|!
50071. west              13% |                         Spaying              | | lsorayms     Isoraying
Southvest |                                                 [                   Spraying      Spraying          i
“ස!             2 |_                   ]                    |    [55%         63                          [සත!
140%%6%51 |                 |       Paning         1    |   |       T         35%     ||                  [seraying


Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka
Talawakelle

                                                   COPYRIGHT
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, scanning or information storage and retrieval
system without the prior written permission from the Director, Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka, Talawakelle
