                  T.R       . ADVISORY CIRCULAR                                                     No.PMPY
Issued in: February 2024                                                                  Serial No. 14/24



                           PROTECTION OF YOUNG TEA FROM NEMATODES
  (This Advisory Circular supersedes the Advisory Circular PM 4 Serial No. 02/10 issued in December 2010
                and related previous Advisory Circulars and links with Advisory Circular PU 4)

1. Introduction
Tea Nematodes are microscopic organisms, which inhabit the tea root system and the soil around.
Besides parasitizing and weakening the host root system, they interfere with the smooth uptake of
water and nutrients, leading to severe nutrient imbalance and physiological stress in the plant

The economically important nematode pests of tea are

    a.   Pratylenchus loosi Loof - "root-lesion nematode" or "meadow eelworm"
    b.   Radopholus similis (Cobb) Thorne - "burrowing nematode”
    c.   Meloidogyne brevicauda Loof - "root-knot nematode”


2. Symptoms of Damage

The typical symptoms     of nematodes are slow decline in growth with the leaves turning a pale-
yellow colour, premature flowering and fruiting and stunted growth of the plant. Similar symptoms
could also be observed due to other stress factors such as drought, water deficit, water logging
and ill-drained conditions and nutrient imbalances etc.


3. Integrated Management of Nematodes in Young Tea

Plant parasitic nematodes affecting tea could be disseminated through planting materials, soil,
water and agricultural implement efc. In the presence of a susceptible root system of a good host,
the residual nematode populations may get developed. Hence, nematodes once introduced to
fields, they cannot be eradicated

Further, all tea growing areas are declared as nematode active and / or prone areas due to
evidences on presence of either of above three species. Therefore, every attempt should be taken
for integrated management of nematodes by adhering to the following measures in young tea.

    a.   The area should be planted to rehabilitation grasses; Mana or Guatemala for a minimum
         period of 2 years. Mana is recommended to all tea growing areas. In areas where the tea
         has been found to 06 infested with the burrowing nematode, Radopholus similis,
         Guatemala grass is not recommended as it is a good host. The CO3 (Hybrid Napier grass-
         Pennisetum purpureum X P. americarnum) grass is recommended for lands with no
         nematode   history and   for a minimum      of 12 months     of rehabilitation   as the biomass
         production 15 comparatively high (Please refer [ට Advisory Circular PM 12).
    b.   Use of nematode free and healthy planting materials of recommended cultivars to the
         region for field planting (please refer to Advisory Circulars PN 1 on Suitability of Tea
         Clones for the Different Regions and PN 2 on Good Nursery Management Practices)
    c.   Adopt all Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs) recommended by TRI to ascertain a healthy
         and vigorous plant growth.
    d.   Prophylactic chemical treatments to bring down any residual plant parasitic nematode
         populations ensuring to avoid invasion to tea roots of the newly introduced tea plants as
         described under section 4.
4. Prophylactic Measures at Planting

Nematode       control   through   chemical   treatments   is not economical     due   to the   hidden   nature   of
nematode damage          in tea fields. Therefore, chemical application is restricted to the time of planting
in the Integrated Management of Nematodes. As a protective measure to minimize any residual
populations of parasitic nematodes,           it is mandatory   to incorporate   a nematicide     into soil in the
planting hole at planting.

The recommended          nematicides at correct dosages should be used as described in the Advisory
Circular PU 4.
Alternatively, 100 g of ground or powdered neem oil cake (neem poonac) could be mixed with soils
in the planting hole.



5. Nematode       Management in Infested Young Tea

When premature flowering and fruiting and / or any symptoms of debilitation have been observed,
the affected areas must be checked for the presence of nematodes.     Proper sampling should be
done as per the method described in Advisory Circular PM 5 for nematode estimation at TRI. If the
cause for such symptoms has been confirmed as nematodes, the following measures should be
carried out over a period of 1 - 2 years.

     a.   An   'Infestation-specific nematode      management     recommendation’      by TRI considering the
          field and crop conditions.
     0.   When nematode affected patches or blocks with heavy infestations have been identified, in
          situ block infilling; uproot affected tea in patches; remove all possible roots and rehabilitate
          the area with a suitable grass species.

    6.    Under a very light nematode infestation with a nematode tolerant tea cultivar, planting of
          nematode suppressive plant species such as Mana (Cymbopogon confertiflorus), Wild Sun
          Flower (Tithonia diversifiora), Wild Chrysanthemum / Mari Kolondu    (Artemisa vulgaris)
          and Marigold (Tagetes sp.) against Pratylenchus loosi and Radopholus similis and Vetiver
          (Vetivaria zizanoides) against Pratylenchus loosi.

    d.    Incorporation of soil organic amendments such as compost and well-decomposed
          reclaimable tea (at the rate of 2 kg per plant) or neem oil cake (at the rate of 500g per plant
          in two splits) depending on availability.

    e.    All Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs) recommended by TRI to minimize impacts from
          other possible factors leading to stress conditions i.e. soil pH, ill - drained and dry soil
          conditions, graveliness, poor and imbalanced manuring etc.



Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka
Talawakelle

                                                    COPYRIGHT

Al rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, scanning or information storage and retrieval
system without the prior written permission from the Director, Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka, Talawakelle
