                T.R.I. ADVISORY CIRCULAR                                                          No.PMER


Issued in: February 2024                                                                   Serial No. 11/24


                  SAMPLING FOR SHOT- HOLE BORER ASSESSMENT

     (This Advisory Circular supersedes the Advisory Circular PM 1 Serial No. 1/03 issued in February 2003
             and related previous Advisory Circulars and links with Advisory Circular PU 4 and PM 2)

It is essential to estimate the infestation level of Shot-hole borer (SHB) (Xyleborus fornicatus
Eichh.), synonym. Euwallacea fornicatus when tea fields are infested with SHB, before deciding
on the appropriate control measures.

1. When to Sample

Immature fields: Sampling should be carried out just prior to first formative prune.

Mature fields: Sampling should be carried out in the final year of the pruning cycle.

2. How to Sample
                                                                                           d by
Sampling should be carried out in one hectare block separately. Blocks could be demarcate
natural boundaries such as roads, paths, ravines,  drains, shade  trees efc,, wherever possible
(Figure 1).



                                                                          N
                                                                      Block 2
                                                                      100 units per 1 ha




                               Block 7




                     Figure 1: Division of a Field into Blocks for sampling

 Sampling should cover the whole extent of the block to obtain a representative sample. It should
                                                                                              than
 comprise 100 standard units per ha, taking not more than one unit per bush. If there is more
 one cultivar in a given field each cultivar should be assessed separately

 3. Standard Units
                                                                                                         that
 Having selected a bush at random, remove a primary branch arising from the pruned stem
 would give a piece of stem 10 cm in length. This piece of stem is referred [ට as a 'standard unit'
 The selection of the branches should be at random and no attempt be made to select only those
 showing signs of galleries.
 The standard units should be split open and examined for galleries (Figure 2). When estimating
 the incidence of gallery making, one should bear in mind that the number of galleries per sample
 unit is immaterial. The unit that has one or more galleries is considered as a single infested unit.




                                                           7
 If there is more than one cultivar in a given field each cultivar should be assessed separately




                                      1
                                                    i
                                                    2       3        4
                         Figure 2: The number of units with galleries that is counted


               A unit with one gallery (galleried)
  හං ස [ම =




               A unit with no galleries (not galleried)
               A unit with two galleries (galleried)
               A unit with three galleries (galleried)
 Number of galleried units = 3

 4. Estimation of Infestation

 The standard units should be split open and examined for the presence of galleries.
                                                                                         The
 percentage incidence (as percentage gallery making) of gallery making (G%) is calculated
                                                                                          as
 follows:
                               G% =         No. of galleried units       ද 100
                                       Total no. of units sampled

5. Recommendations
   % Gallery making (G%)                  Degree of infestation                  Control measures
              0-25%                         Light                                  Not necessary
              26 -50%                      Moderate                                  Necessary
              51-100%                      Heavy                                    Compulsory

Please refer Advisory Circular PU 4 and PM 2 to implement the control measures appropriat
                                                                                                             e to
the field based on above recommendations.

Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka
Talawakelle

                                                         COPYRIGHT
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, scanning or information
                                                                                     storage and retrieval
system without the prior written permission from the Director, Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka,
                                                                                                      Talawakelle
