                   T.R.I. ADVISORY CIRCULAR                                                               No.PM[FE

Issued in: February 2024                                                                        Serial No. 16/24



                                            MITE CONTROL
  (This Advisory Circular supersedes Advisory Circular PM 6 with Serial No. 01/08 issued in June 2008 and
                   related previous Advisory Circulars and links with Advisory Circular PU 4)



1. Introduction
Five species of mites cause damage to tea in Sri Lanka. Their common names are Red Spider
Mite (Oligonychus coffeae Neither), Scarlet Mite (Brevipalpus californicus Banks), Yellow Mite
(Hemitarsonemus latus Banks), Purple Mite (Calacarus carinatus Green) and Pink Rust Mite
(Acaphyila theae Watt).

Tea mites are generally dry-weather pests, feeding on tea foliage but also attacking other
vegetation, such as certain species of shade trees, cover crops, weeds, efc. Tea by roadsides and
in pockets, exposed to various environmental and physiological stress factors, are prone to
infestation by different species of mites.

Mites often make their appearance in isolated pockets at the beginning of dry weather, and unless
controlled in time they can spread over an entire field causing significant toss of the crop. In
particular, Scarlet Mite and Red Spider Mite could result in a setback to bush growth.


2. Mite-prone Fields and Spot Treatments

While some fields are prone to mite infestations, others are seldom affected. It is advisable to use
spot applications of acaricides for prevention rather than as a curative measure after infestation.


3.Rain and Mites
Though mite infestation is generally less pronounced during wet weather, mild wet-weather
conditions are not conducive to its eradication. In fact, light rain promotes Yellow Mite. Red Spider
Mite infestations continue into monsoonal weather once the populations reach high levels.


4.Damage Symptoms

4.1. Red Spider Mite

It mainly attacks the upper surface of the maintenance foliage. This mite could be identified by the
bronze colouration of its upper surface. Webs and minute white specks of cast skin are visible.

Thumb      Nail Test. When   පූ thumb is pressed against an affected leaf, a pin-dot mark of mite blood
appears.
4.2. Purple Mite

Older leaves are preferred. These mites occur on both surfaces of the leaf. The leaves attacked
have a dull matt appearance and a purplish-bronze discolouration.

4.3. Pink Rust Mite
Young leaves are preferred. Mostly found on the under surface of the leaf, but found on the upper
surface as well. Petioles and tender stems are also attacked. The affected leaves become pale in
colour and curl upwards. The veins and margins show a pinkish discolouration

                                                           1
4.4. Scarlet Mite
Feeds    mainly on the lower surface of the maintenance foliage, especially near the midrib and on
the petiole. There is a dark-brown necrosis of the midrib and petiole. Heavy attack leads to severe
defoliation.
4.5. Yellow Mite
Mainly attacks the younger leaves, the first 2 or 3 leaves and the bud. Found in nurseries, young
tea fields and fields recovering from prune The flush is stunted, deformed and brittle, and pale and
yellow in colour The feeding area remains as a light corky-brown necrotic strip over the mid-rib.


5. Integrated Approaches to Manage             Mites

In order to ensure successful control of mites in tea lands, proper monitoring should be undertaken
for obtaining an understanding of the spread, locations and specific times of the year where the
mites occur.

5.1. Planting of non-host plants 01 mites on road sides such as Artemisia spp., Wild sunflower as
the road side with dust enhances the buildup of mite population.

5.2. Improve and maintain shade during dry period to reduce stress for tea as the stressed plants
are highly susceptible to mites.
5.3. Ensure balanced fertilization to minimize stress.
5.4. Chemical Control
Chemical       spraying   should   be   used   only    when   the   signs   of mite   damages   appear   and   the
infestation stages of the mites are known.
Please refer Advisory Circular PU 4 for recommended acaricides and dosages.

For effective control of mites, spraying should be done to the undersurface of the foliage as well.

Spraying in plucking fields should be carried out immediately after plucking

When fields sprayed with Sulphur, the green leaves should be bulked with ten times the amount of
flush from unsprayed areas.


Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka
Talawakelle

                                                      COPYRIGHT

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, scanning or information storage and retrieval
system without the prior written permission from the Director, Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka, Talawakelle
