                    .R.l. ADVISORY                            CIRCULAR                            No.oMEA
Issued in: February 2024                                                                   Serial No. 10/24


                     MANAGEMENT OF HORSE-HAIR BLIGHT IN TEA
                      (This Advisory Circular cancels Guideline 1/03 issued in May 2003)


1. Introduction
Horse-hair Blight is so named because the cord of mycelium (rhizomorph), which is blackish, round
and rather stout, has a striking resemblance to the black horse hair. It is caused by the fungus
Marasmius crinis-equi which is an epiphyte (growing on the bush without deriving its nourishment
from the living tissues) seen to be growing on the branches and leaves of the tea bush. It is often
mistaken for a parasite because of the dead leaves and twigs being attached to the hair-like chords.
Besides tea, it has been recorded on nutmeg, rubber and other jungle shrubs.

2. Symptoms
Horse-hair Blight originates either from the main stem or any of the branches and the fungal strands
grow upwards, with the help of small brown pads of hyphal aggregates, crisscrossing the entire bush
This results in තූ matrix of netting, in which all the debris and falling leaves are entrapped. The fungus
usually obtains its nourishment from the dead outer bark of the older tea stems as well as from the
decaying material within its entangle. The problem assumes greater dimensions towards the latter
stages of the pruning cycle, giving the bush a very unhygienic appearance. Heavily affected bushes
would generally appear to be unthrifty.

3. Occurrence and Spread
This problem is normally more prevalent in tea fields situated below 600 m elevation, possibly due to
temperature and humidity being relatively high, and hence it is considered බූ low-country problem
Low lying riverbed-associated flat terrains are more conducive to this problem, even though it is also
commonly seen in shady and damp upper slopes of fields.

Though this was considered an insignificant problem in the past, mainly affecting debilitated tea,
increased incidences and intensities have been reported in recent times probably due to expansion of
tea planting into more marginal conditions. The lack of attention to details, like adequate post-prune
bush sanitation, may have permitted the few strands first noticeable to multiply to heavy proportions
over subsequent    cycles.   The remnants    left behind   at pruning   would   lead to a greater tangle of
mycelial threads by the end of the current cycle capable of collecting more debris and falling leaves.

Since the fungus is non-parasitic, no direct damage is done to the growing bush. However, it can
cause a heavy leaf fall and physical hindrance to operations such as plucking and pruning (more so
with mechanical pruning), the severity varying in proportion to the undisturbed age of the tangle.

4. Remedial Measures
    e   Maintenance of bush sanitation is of paramount importance. Cleaning of bush frames should
        commence at first prune, and any black mycelial threads present should be removed
        physically. Such bush sanitation, at pruning, should be practiced on all new clearings in areas
        below 600 m.

    e   Burying the prunings and mycelial threads of the fungus.
    s    Spraying of hydrated lime on 10 tea bush frames should be considered mandatory after each
         prune. About    1,000   L of this solution would   be required    to cover     1 ha of tea (Please refer
         Advisory Circular PU2)
    «    Improving soil conditions by the addition of organic matter combined with periodic forking is
         also an indispensable operation.

    *     Poorly drained (alluvial) soils should be provided with better drainage and aeration.

    e    During monsoon periods, adequate sunlight and             ambient   aeration     should   be   provided   by
         adopting proper shade management practices.



Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka
Talawakelle

                                                     COPYRIGHT
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, scanning or information storage and retrieval system|
without the prior written permission from the Director, Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka, Talawakelle
