                 T.R.I. ADVISORY CIRCULAR                                                        |, (2:17|


Issued in: February 2024                                                                 Serial No. 17/24



                                  CONTROL OF WHITE GRUBS
 (This Advisory Circular Supersedes Advisory Circular PM 7 Serial No. 04/02 issued in November 2002 and
                           related previous Advisory Circulars and links to PU4)



1.    Introduction
                                                                                                 known as
The root-feeding larvae of scarabaeid beetles (chafers or cockchafers) are commonly
                                                                                         also
“white grubs” and about 90% of the reported damage in tea is in new clearings. Damage is
                                                                                  clearings and
seen in tea nurseries, new clearings, infilling blocks, mana or Guatemala
                                                                                in the following
occasionally in fuel wood clearings. The damage in new clearings is significant
                                                                                     Madulsima,
areas: Udapussellawa, Dimbula, Maturata, Pundaluoya, Pussellawa, Kotmale,
                                                           Hewaheta, Passara,   Ratnapura     and
Dickoya, Welimada, Nuwara Eliya, Haputale, Dolosbage,
                                                                         and  Maturata   districts
Galle. It is recommended that the plantations in Udapussellawa, Dimbula
                                                                                through
should protect their new clearings from white grub damage as a routine practice
                                                                                        early infestation of
prophylactic treatments. Also, proper vigilance should be maintained to detect
white grubs.

2.    Cyclic Pattern of White Grub Development
                                                                                 numbers of these
The adult beetles deposit their eggs in the soil from about March to June. Large
                                                                                  be encountered
beetles are often attracted 10 lights in March/April. The ovipositing beetles can
                                                                                      from about
underneath thatch covers or in the surface soil. The larvae start emerging from eggs
                                                                                      are found
June until about August. The feeding grubs, which assume a "ට" shape when exposed,
                                            commenc es generally in October, reaching a peak in
in the soil from June to November. Pupation
                                                                                   cockchafers is the same
January of the following year. The chronological pattern of the life cycle of
in both south-west and north-east monsoon zones.

3.   Damage Symptoms
                                                                                         and Microtrichia
 Of the different species of white grubs found in tea lands Holotrichia disparilis
                                                                                    The grubs can move
 costata cause economically significant injury to young plants in new clearings.
                                                                                    callused stump from
 from plant to plant. H. disparilis often chews the roots off completely, leaving a
                                                              The  grubs can  also,  ring-bark the young
 which the plant may attempt to regenerate new roots.
 plants at the collar. M. costata may also, attack shade trees such as Acacia decurrence.
                                                                                  like Teak and also,
 Anomala superflua is a low country species attacking mainly timber species
                                                                                   at times completely
 nursery plants and occasionally tea roots. Leucopholis pinguis attacks grasses,
                                                          grasses to recover.  Damage    to Guatemala
 devouring the roots like in Mana and not allowing the
                                                                              the damaged    section.
 does not generally kill the grass as adventitious develop from nodes above

 4.   Attraction to Organic Matter
                                                                                 grubs are found
 All attacks have been encountered in soils rich in decaying organic matter. The
                                                                               hardly any in sandy
 predominantly in areas of the fields having high organic matter content and
                                                                                        white grub
 and gravelly areas. When compost is used in planting holes and or as soil amendments,
 adults could be attracted.
 5.     Integrated Approach to Manage White Grubs

 5.1 Land Preparation
 Forking and cultivation 01 soil during land preparation will facilitate the exposure of white grubs to
 predators such as birds.
 5.2 Light Traps

Light traps placed during March-May in white grub-prone areas will trap adult beetles in dispersal
flight

5.3 Special Care with Agronomic Operations

To avoid white grub adult attraction, special attention and care should be taken for when

   i.   compost 15 used in planting holes and or as soil amendments.
 ii.    live mulches such as Mana, grasses etc are used.
iii.    organic matter is broadcast in tea lands /.6. compost, reclaimable tea and paddy husk etc.

5.4 Artificial Mulching
Artificial agriculture mulch restricts egg laying by adult beetles around tea bushes. Thatching
should be done prior to the egg laying period which usually begins from March to May.

5.5 Chemical Control
The grubs have an extended feeding period of about 8 months. Tea plants can succumb to grub
damage during the 1-3 years. The new clearings should be protected from the grubs during
                                                                                              June-
October. Repeat application may be necessary in 2™ year if the grubs are active in the field during
June- October.
Please refer to Advisory Circular PU 4 to select recommended chemicals and dosages


Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka
Talawakelle

                                                 COPYRIGHT
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, scanning or information storage and retrieval
system without the prior written permission from the Director, Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka, Talawakelle
