                  T.R.l. ADVISORY CIRCULAR                                                         No.PMEP]


Issued in: February 2024                                                                 Serial No. 22/24


                  UPROOTING, REHABILITATION AND REPLANTING
                       OF NEMATODE INFESTED TEA LANDS
            (This Advisory Circular supersedes Advisory Circular No. N 4 issued in August 1990)



1. Introduction
1.1 Mitigation of Nematode Infestations

Microscopic nematode pests once introduced and established in a tea land, it is difficult 19
eradicate. Direct damage and secondary effects by plant parasitic nematodes causes long-term
and unrecoverable effects leading to instability in crop yields. Associations of other secondary
disease complexes and physiological disorders along with inferior or poor crop and soil conditions
further aggravate to minimize establishment, productivity and profitability of tea. Chemical control
of nematodes is anyway not economic and practical in tea fields. Maintaining such areas would
therefore be uneconomical as well as serve as nematode inoculums for rest of sections and or
hitherto uninfested tea areas. Thus, all steps described below should be strictly adopted in all tea
growing areas in view 01 mitigating the nematode incidence in tea.

1.2   Importance     of Replanting       Nematode      Infested    Areas    in   Integrated       Nematode
Management

Replanting is considered an important agronomic operation which replaces unproductive, old,
nematode and other soil pathogen infested tea lands or sections as well as fields with stress
factors limiting growth and productivity of tea. In this context, the aims of replanting are therefore
to correct the limiting factors in the land for a sustainable, productive and cost effective newly
established crop.

Proper soil sampling for nematode infestation should be carried out in unproductive immature or
mature tea fields and prior to uprooting as per instructions given in the Advisory Circular PM 5. If
nematode infestation has been ruled out as the main stress factor or leading to soil sickness in an
area, the following steps should be rigidly followed during the replanting process. In the whole
process of replanting, removal of plant and field limiting attributes, preparation of land, selection of
appropriate sources of planting materials to suit to new planting should be given due
consideration,

2. Rehabilitation of Nematode Infested Areas
2.1 Uprooting Procedure

All diseased and unproductive bushes should be uprooted manually or preferably with the aid of
mechanical winches, if available. A single tea plant should not anyway be left in the area which
may serve as a source of nematodes. The operation should be done from top to bottom in order to
avoid subsequent nematode contaminations.

If nematode infested tea bushes of a patch of land or section are to be removed, tea plants in the
concentric circle should also be uprooted in order to ensure complete removal of nematode
sources.
Following uprooting, the area should be forked thoroughly to a depth of about 45 cm (18 inches)
and all tea roots, above the thickness of a pencil to be removed.

Uprooted tea bushes should not be taken away and transported from place to place to avoid
dissemination of nematode infestation. The roots removed from the ground should be collected
and burnt in situ.
Soils should not anyway be collected for nursery purpose (Please refer the Advisory Circular PN 2
for sources of nursery soils)

2.2 Land Preparation

Any 501] limiting stress factor such as hard pan, ill-drained, water logging or gravelly condition efc.
should be corrected to facilitate proper establishment of new plants. Also, along with leveling and
land preparation, complete all other field operations such as terracing and drains, shade tree
planting efc. in order [0 minimize chances of subsequent nematode contaminations.
2.3 Rehabilitation of Lands Using Grasses

Rehabilitation of nematode infested tea fields and or the area / block identified for infilling process
with a non host plant species is a pre requisite in all tea growing areas in view of imposing a long
break for not allowing the nematode to survive and multiply further.

Improvement of soil biological, chemical and physical characters conducive for the new crop is
also envisaged through acceleration of organic matter status, structure, neutralize allelopathic
effects of long-term cultivation of tea, break down residues of agro chemicals, pesticides, fertilizers
etc. Resultantly, development and muiltiplication of densities of inherent natural enemies 01
nematodes such as bacteria, fungi, micro arthropods, free living and saprophytic nematode
species are favored
The nematode infested area/s identified by the TRI be planted with Mana or Guatemala for an
extended rehabilitation period as recommended by the TRI.

Mana is recommended to all tea growing areas. In areas where the tea has been found to be
infested with the burrowing nematode, Radopholus similis, Guatemala grass is not recommended
as it is a good host

003 (Hybrid Napier grass - Pennisetum perpureum X P. americarnum) grass is recommended for
lands with no nematode history and for a minimum of 12 months of rehabilitation as the biomass
production is comparatively high (Please refer TRI Guideline 02/2018 issued in December 2018).

The grass rehabilitated areas should be maintained by regular lopping along with recommended
inputs; fertilizers etc. (Please refer to Advisory Circular SP 6 for application rates).

The grass should be cut periodically before flowering and incorporated in to the land to improve
the organic matter levels.

NOTES:
Patna areas and lands with Guinea grass (Megathyrsus maximus) are not considered as grass
rehabilitated areas.

Soils from grass rehabilitated areas meant for replanting should never be taken for nursery
purpose instead, a separate grass lands should be maintained.
Further, cut grass from rehabilitated areas meant for replanting should not be taken away for
thatching purpose instead, a separate grass lands should be maintained.
3. Replanting
The rehabilitated land should be planted with uninfested, healthy and vigorous plants of nematode
tolerant cultivars recommended to the region (Please refer to the Advisory Circular PN 1).

As an additional insurance against possible contamination of the young plants, it is vital to
incorporate a nematicide in the planting as a prophylactic treatment (Please refer to the Advisory
Circular PU 4 for recommended chemicals and rates).



Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka
Talawakelle

                                                 COPYRIGHT

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, scanning or information storage and retrieval
system without the prior written permission from the Director, Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka, Talawakelle
