                   T.R.I. ADVISORY CIRCULAR                                                                   No.PMEH
Issued in: February 2024                                                                            Serial No. 15/24



                            SAMPLING FOR NEMATODE ANALYSIS
 (This Advisory Circular supersedes the Advisory Circular PM 5 Serial No. 03/10 issued in December 2010
                                     and related previous Advisory Circulars)



1. Introduction
All species of pathogenic nematodes of tea inhabit roots and soil. However, their number and
activity will depend on soil factors such as soil temperature, moisture, depth, use of agro-
chemicals and organic matter etc. and plant factors such as age, cultivar and pruning cycle.

Tea fields or nurseries may show symptoms caused by nematodes such as slow decline in growth,
yellowing of leaves, premature flowering and fruiting and stunted growth etc. due to other stress
factors such as drought, water deficit, clayeyness, hard pan and water logging conditions, nutrient
imbalances etc. Before taking samples for nematode estimation, such factors should be ruled out.

In order to assure a realistic nematode estimation, the sampling procedure should be different in a
nursery and a field. Necessary sampling should be done to represent different cultivars, ages,
conditions and symptoms of nematodes and weaknesses in plants of nursery or field.

Nematode      diagnosis   is also   proposed     as    an   internal   quarantine     measure   in assuring   use   of
nematode     free and     healthy   planting   materials     restricting     dissemination   01 parasitic nematode
species through planting materials in the tea growing areas.



2. Sampling for Diagnostic Purposes

Early detection helps to check on the spread of nematode infestation. It could also curtail the
extent of damage by enabling the adoption of appropriate and timely corrective measures.
Sampling should therefore, be done at critical points where nematode introduction, establishment
and or development could possibly occur. Such vigilance is most essential amongst nursery, newly
planted    young   tea fields and     mature    tea.    Infestation    can    only   be confirmed    by microscopic
examination of soil and root samples.

Soil and root sampling in the nursery/field should              be assigned to a responsible person and be
carried out under close supervision. An analytical              report would only be as good as the sample
submitted.


3. Sampling    in the Nursery

Sampling should commence about six months after the putting out of cuttings, or seed, in the
nursery, when adequate roots have been developed. It is appropriate to sample the nursery prior
to restacking plants. A minimum of 10 g of root material is needed per sample and the method
adopted for sampling is as follows.
    ඛු.   Take at least 5 plants at random from each bed of 1,000 plants.
    0.    Cut off the feeder roots, after removing the plants from the bags, and transfer the feeder
          roots to a clean polythene bag.
    c.    Cover the root sample with some moist soil to avoid drying.
    d.   Label each bag with Estate name,              Division, Cultivar, Bed     No., Age, Date of sampling and
         time.
In order to facilitate interpretation of the results of analysis and to give appropriate
recommendations, it is necessary [0 send the duly filled Nursery History Fact Sheet issued from
TRI



4. Requisites of Field Sampling
Soil or root samples       in the field should      be drawn   when     the soil is adequately      moist for at least 2
weeks.

Soil and root sampling should be avoided after any soil disturbances such as fertilizer, soil
agrochemical applications and / or organic matter additions. A minimum of one-month period
should be given for sampling.

It is also necessary to submit the duly perfected Crop and Field History Fact Sheet issued from
TRI along with the samples to receive a proper diagnostic report.



4.1. Sampling in New Clearings and Mature Fields
Sampling of tea fields suspected with nematode infestation is important for diagnostic purpose and
necessary    recommendations.           Both   soil and   roots are required        for detecting     the presence     of
nematodes        in tea fields.   The   following   method     should    be   adopted   to draw     representative   soil
samples.

Additional samples may also be taken separately from fields and or patches and weak areas
showing possible nematode symptoms. In fields due for pruning, sampling is recommended to be
drawn 6 months prior to intended month of prune.

Divide the field into blocks of 2 ha each using natural boundaries such as footpaths etc. wherever
possible (Figure 1)


    a.   Collect 25-30 samples at random points from each such 2 ha block.

    b.   Collect about 50 g soil from each sampling point. The samples should be taken 15 cm (8")
         away from the base of the bush and at a depth of 15-25 cm (6-10") with an Auger or
         ordinary crow bar (‘Alavangoe").

    c.   Also collect feeder roots from each sampling point.

    d.   Pool the soil and root samples obtained from respective blocks and make about 500 g of
         the composite soil sample along with roots in a clean polythene bag and seal the bag
         properly.

    e.   Label each bag using a permanent marker with Estate name,                      Division, Field No., Cultivar,
         Block No., Age, Date of sampling and time. Also, a tag with above details may be inserted.
                                                                               \
                                                              soil {50g) and root
                                                             samples from 25-30
                                                                 random points




                                                                      |
                                                             Composite Sample
                                                           (500 g soil and all roots)



                                                                        TRI

Figure      1:   Method   of collecting   representative   root and soil samples from     young    and   mature   tea
fields for nematode estimation


4.2. Sampling        in Mature Fields Prior to Uprooting

Soil and root populations of the parasitic nematode species in tea fields are expected to be
aggravated with time. Hence, the residual nematode populations in mature tea fields due for
uprooting would possibly serve as a source of inoculum in new clearings.

Hence, sampling is recommended to be drawn 6 months prior to intended month of uprooting to
diagnose the nematode infestation level for adopting appropriate nematode management
practices.

In 16105 due for pruning, sampling 15 recommended to be drawn 6 months prior to intended month
of prune.
In fields identified for uprooting, sampling 15 recommended to be drawn 6 months prior to intended
month of uprooting to diagnose the nematode infestation level for adopting appropriate nematode
management practices.

5. Dispatch of Samples to TRI

The samples should be kept away from direct sunlight or any other condition that may promote
heat during sampling and transport to avoid overheating in order to ascertain the life 01 the
resident nematode populations.

The      samples     should    be dispatched     to the    nearest     Nematology   Laboratories   at Talawakelle,
Hantane, and Ratnapura. Samples need to reach the laboratories compulsorily within 48 hours of
sampling along with duly perfected Crop and Field / Nursery History Data sheet. Undue delay
could lead 19 dehydration and death of nematodes, thereby resulting in erroneous estimates of
nematode counts
For a pre-arranged appointment to dispatch of samples to the TRI, please contact the respective
Nematology laboratories.



6. Important

Please note that the Institute does not accept the following samples for nematode estimation.

a.   Water Samples:         Testing of water for estimating         nematodes   is a laborious exercise which
     requires   advanced     techniques   for physical    recovery    of nematodes    from   a large volume    of
     water.

     If an estate is in a nematode prone area and known to have nematode infested fields, one
     should assume that the water courses running through the fields are contaminated. For further
     details on preventing contamination, please refer [ට the Advisory Circular PM 8

0.   Soil for Filling Nursery Bags: It is mandatory that all soils intended to (156 for tea nursery
     work be sterilized. For selection of soils for nurseries and soil sterilizing techniques, please
     refer to the Advisory Circular PN 2.



Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka
Talawakelle



                                                   COPYRIGHT

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical,    including photocopying,   recording,   scanning or information storage and retrieval
system without the prior written permission from the Director, Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka,   Talawakelle
