                                . ADVISORY                           CIRCULAR                                   No.DM         Kl

Issued in: February 2024                                                                             Serial No. 04/24

                           PROTECTION OF TEA FROM BLISTER BLIGHT
     (This Advisory Circular supersedes the Advisory Circular DM 1, Serial No. 1/02 issued in October 2002 and
                      related previous Advisory Circulars and links with Advisory Circular PU 2)


1. Introduction
Blister blight disease of tea is caused by a fungus (Exobasidium vexans Massee.) and is spread
by wind- borne spores. A high relative humidity (85%) is required for spore production and their
release. Most importantly high moisture on the leaf surface favors germination of spores and
infection. Therefore, conditions of persistent mist and dew are particularly conducive to high levels
of infection. The spores are killed when they are exposed to either direct sunlight or desiccation
The disease is of great economic importance during the rainy seasons බූ! mid and high elevations
(>600 m).
Blister blight fungus can infect only young            succulent leaves and tender stems.          As the leaves and
stems mature, they become immune to infection


2. Disease Management
Integrated      disease    management      inclusive    of plant   resistance,    cultural   practices    and   chemical
spraying is emphasized.


2.1 Resistant Cultivars
No cultivars have so far been found to be totally resistant to this disease.                      Only gradations of
susceptibility have been found in the various cultivars of tea. Growing resistant cultivars is the best
option. The amount of money spent on chemical control can be proportionately reduced with the
increase in resistance of a selected cultivars. To select blister blight resistant cultivar/s for planting,
please refer Advisory Circular PN 1.


2.2 Cultural Methods
Cultural practices are the measures undertaken to prevent and control                               the     disease     by
manipulating plants and the environment. These practices include the following:
1.      Shade   management:     Thinning    and   removal    of excess    shade     to provide adequate         sun   light
        and ventilation.
2.      Plucking manipulation: Shorter plucking rounds and hard plucking to remove                       infected leaves
        and reduce the amount of inoculum and the rate of spread.
3.      Good   Agricultural  Practices:  Timely and  balanced fertilization avoiding  unnecessary
        succulence of the foliage, and timely weed management in the pruned fields up to tipping to
        avoid stem blisters.


2.3 Chemical Methods
The following categories of fungicides, which have protective and curative mode of action, can be
used to control the Blister Blight Disease in tea.
        1.   Protective - Copper Fungicides
        2.   Curative - Systemic Fungicides
2.3.1 Copper Fungicides
Copper fungicides, which are protective in their action, have                     been found to give adequate
protection against blister blight in tea. When sprayed, copper                    deposited on the leaf surface
prevents the germination of spores, thereby preventing infection.                 However,     copper will have no
effect if applied after the fungus has penetrated the leaf surface.
The main ingredient of these fungicides is metallic copper (Cu) and can be available in the forms
of oxides, oxychlorides, hydroxides or sulphates. Their formulations could be either wettable
powders (WP), dry-flowable powders (DF), wettable granules (WG) and suspension concentrate
(SC). All recommendations are based on copper formulations having 50% copper (w/w) or lower.
Different dosages are recommended for different formulations due to the differences in fineness 01
the commercial preparations and their resultant spreadability/miscibility in water.
Based on their solubility they have been categorized into two major groups. They are;
           Group (a) - Copper oxides (insoluble in water)
           Group (b) - Copper hydroxides, Tribasic copper sulphate (slightly soluble in water)


2.3.2 Systemic Fungicides
Systemic fungicides have both protective and curative properties. Unlike the protectant fungicides,
they can cure an established infection at early stages.
The disadvantages of the fungicides are the high costs, potential residues in made tea and the
likelihood of the fungus developing resistance to the fungicide and retain residues in made tea
It 19 recommended to adopt the following strategies to overcome the disadvantages:
       i   Use the lowest possible concentration of fungicide as recommended                   by the TRI based on
           the disease severity.
   ॥       Alternate use of systemic fungicides that belong [0 different groups, possessing                   different
           modes of action with protectant copper fungicides (except for plucking fields).
 fii.      Limit the total number of applications per season to a minimum possible, following
           sunshine hours (cumulative total of 20 hours sunshine over the previous five days is
           sufficient to prevent disease reaching an economic damage level).
  iv.       Avoid a fungicidal spray when there are a minimum of 4 hours of sunshine at a stretch for
           5 consecutive days and during heavy rains.


2.4 Management of Blister Blight in Nurseries
Succulent     stems   and   leaves   of the   nursery   plants   are   attacked   by   blister blight,   affecting   the
overall growth of the plants.
Select cultivars resistant to blister blight for establishing a nursery (please refer Advisory Circular
PN1).
Avoid dense shade in nurseries during monsoonal weather.
Spray fungicides as recommended in Advisory Circular PU2. Apply copper fungicides and systemic
fungicides, either individually or as alternative sprays using a knapsack sprayer.


2.5 Management of Blister Blight in Young Tea
Tender young plants are also prone to heavy attacks of blister blight. Repeated heavy infections
could seriously damage newly establishing plants. Therefore, it is essential to pay more attention
for the control of blister blight at this stage of growth.
 Closer spraying rounds are recommended using a knapsack sprayer in order to wet all the young
 foliage and tender stems for maximum protection
 Use of both copper fungicides and systemic fungicides, either individually or as alternative spraying
 are recommended for controlling Blister Blight in young tea fields
 Please refer Advisory Circular PU2,     for the details of the products,   dosages   and the methods        of
 application.


 2.6 Management of Blister Blight in Tea Recovering from Pruning
 On account of blister blight, the most critical time for a tea bush is during the period it is recovering
 after pruning. During this time all its leaves and shoots are young and tender. The loss of newly
 emerging stems and leaves at this stage will cause a serious setback to growth. The regeneration
 growth to replace dead shoots is possible only at further expense of food reserves. Therefore, if
 the pruned bushes are not adequately protected, incidence of blister blight could cause very
                                                                                              poor
 recovery, which may even lead to their death
 Schedule lopping of shade trees at the onset of the monsoon and weeding in post-pruned fields.
 Blister blight disease could be effectively controlled in pruned fields by strictly following the
 fungicide spray schedules as recommended in Advisory Circular PU2. Both copper fungicides
                                                                                               and
 systemic fungicides can be applied in tea fields recovering from pruning.
Application of fungicides should commence with the bud break (approximately three weeks from
pruning) and be continued up to the time of tipping (approximately three months). For maximum
protection, it is preferable to use knapsack sprayers in order to wet all the young foliage and tender
stems. The last two applications prior to tipping should be carried out carefully, by making every
effort to get the lance into the bush. This would ensure that the tender parts, that would
                                                                                                 be
exposed, following tipping are also protected by the fungicides. The application of systemic
fungicides should be terminated 2-3 weeks before tipping in order avoid fungicide residues
                                                                                             in the
final product.


2.7 Management of Blister Blight in Tea in Harvesting
2.7.1 Cultural Method
Reduce natural shade by lopping shade trees at the beginning of the monsoons:

        1.6.       April/May, in the Western sector

                   September/October, in the Eastern sector.


This allows maximum available sunshine falling on the plucking table, which in itself has fungicidal
properties.
Shorter plucking    rounds (5-7 days) and   hard plucking   (up 19 fish leaf) reduce subsequent    blister
blight infections. In order to improve the bush health, the fields may 06 rested or lightly plucked
intermittently for a period of 6-8 weeks following these practices


2.7.2 Chemical Method
Only copper fungicides, using knapsack sprayers or mist-blowers, are recommended for controlling
Blister Blight in tea in harvesting. Spraying should be done on the day following harvesting or
immediately thereafter. In the event of harvesting rounds being delayed or extended, the spraying
rounds must be made sufficiently flexible, enabling a pre- harvest interval of 7 days with copper
fungicides, prior to harvesting.
Both, High Volume Sprays (hand-operated knapsack sprayers) or Low Volume                             Sprays     (mist-
blowers) could be used to spray copper fungicides in tea fields in harvesting.
The following points are important for effective control of the disease:
      Good protection depends on good supervision of spraying operation
ii.   Itis important that the recommended amount of fungicides be sprayed on to the stipulated
      area for effective control.
      Spraying during continuous heavy rain is not warranted for two reasons. First, there is less
      likelihood of infection as the spores too could get washed off. Second, any fungicide applied
      during this time could also get washed off. Cool humid weather with overcast skies is very
      conducive for infection and spraying is best carried out during such periods. During light
      drizzles spraying could be undertaken when they are not likely to wash off the fungicides from
      leaves.

      Spray equipment should be periodically checked and maintained in good condition.
      Wettable powders should be first made into a paste with a little water and then diluted to the
      required volume.
Vi,   Personnel safety should be ensured by wearing personal protective equipment coverall,
      gloves, mask, and shoes.


Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka
Talawakelle

                                                  COPYRIGHT
Al rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical,   including photocopying,   recording,   scanning   or information   storage   and retrieval|
system without the prior written permission from the Director, Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka, Talawakelle|
