                     T.R.l. ADVISORY CIRCULAR                                                             No.PM
                                                                                                              X


Issued in: February 2024                                                                         Serial No. 19/24



                  MANAGEMENT OF UP COUNTRY LIVE WOOD TERMITE
     (This Advisory Circular supersedes the Advisory Circular PM 9 Serial No. 02/08 issued in June 2008 and related
                                              previous Advisory Circulars)



1.     Method of Detection of Termite-infested Tea
The Up Country Live-wood Termite (Postelectrotermes militaris Desneux) is reported in areas of
Maskeliya and high elevations of Pundaluoya and Radella. It gains entry into the tea plant through the
roots and constructs galleries within the woody tissues of the roots, collar, and finally the
branches. As a result of this concealed habitat, an infested bush remains unnoticed. However,
when branches are affected, prune cuts made at the time of pruning would show cavities filled with
faecal matter, and occasionally the termites as well.

During periods of moisture stress, one or two branches on a bush may also show signs 01 wilting. Since
such wilting may be caused by reasons other than termite infestation, a few of these branches should be
cut back and examined to confirm whether termite infestation is the cause, or whether there are other
causes.

2.     Method of Uprooting Termite-infested Areas

When termite-infested bushes are noticed at pruning, the frames of neighbouring bushes should also be
examined carefully for signs of galleries. Such infested bushes should be uprooted until two concentric
rings of plants show no further signs of infestation by termites. The particular patch should be
blocked out, the area deep-forked and all tea roots, at least up 10 pencil thickness, should be removed.
The uprooted plants and roots should be collected and burnt in situ, and should not be transported out
of the infested area. A few old tar- or oil barrels could be used 10 burn the infested bushes and roots.

3.     Treatments
Even though all infested plants and roots are removed and burnt in situ, in practice a few roots are likely
to be left behind, from which re-infestation could subsequently occur. An extended period of
rehabilitation (up 10 four years) would guarantee the decay of such root fragments, and so prevent re-
infestation. It is therefore suggested that after having ensured බූ thorough root-removal operation
following uprooting, commencing around December of the year of prune, the area be leveled and
prepared for planting with Guatemala or Mana grass with the onset of the south-west monsoonal rains
in May/June of the year following the prune. The grass should then be retained throughout the entire
cycle (4-5 years) and the block planted to tea in the year of the following prune. During the extended
period of rehabilitation under grass, any small, infested root fragments left behind would have decayed.
The grass should be regularly lopped, and the loppings incorporated into the soil to improve the soil
organic matter content and the soil structure.

4.     Integrated Management of UCLWT

4.1. Suggested Programme for Termite Control

Termite control on the estate scale should not be attempted haphazardly and a well-defined
programme should be developed to control the pest (Figure 1). Work should be undertaken on a
priority basis, and programmed in the following manner.
Termite-infested patches in fields that are to be retained for a long period (Group 2) and those to
be uprooted and replanted at the end of the cycle (Group 1) should be very clearly demarcated.

Priority 1

Termite-infested patches in Group 2 fields should be uprooted in December of the year of prune as
recommended above and planted with Guatemala or Mana grass in May/June of the year following the
prune. These patches should be block in-filled with tea at the next prune only after a period of three
years' rehabilitation (if it is on a four-year cycle) or four years’ rehabilitation (if it 15 on a five-year cycle).
As planting of Guatemala or Mana has to be completed by May/June of the year following the prune, the
number of termite patches that could be tackled would depend on the availability of labour. However, if
all termite patches in such fields cannot be properly treated prior to the planting of Guatemala or Mana
by May/June in the year following the prune, they should be left under tea and tackled on the same
basis in the following pruning cycle.

Priority ॥


Termite-infested patches in Group 1 fields should be uprooted as recommended above, in December of
the 2 year from prune, and these patches planted with Guatemala or Mana in May/June of the 3¢
year from prune. However, if there are a large number of termite patches in fields due for uprooting
and replanting, it may not be possible [0 have all of them treated and ready for planting with Guatemala
or Mana by May/June of the 3 year. In such instances, some of the patches may 06 uprooted in
December of the 3'" year, and planted with Guatemala or Mana by May/June of the 4" year at the
latest. This will effectively eliminate the loss of identity of the termite patches when the entire field is
uprooted. Following the treatment of termite patches, the general uprooting should commence in
December of the 5" year, and the soil rehabilitated for a period of two years with Guatemala or Mana
as shown in the Schedule (Figure 1). When the method of treatment undergrass, suggested above, is
adopted, followed by the usual two-year rehabilitation under Guatemala grass following the general
uprooting of the field, the termite-infested patches would have beenunder grass for about 5-6
years.

It is assumed that in all the A-category fields, and the better B-category fields, one would come
across only a few termite-infested patches. If for some reason or the other, one encounters large
numbers of termite-infested patches distributed throughout a given field, such a field should obviously be
considered as one that needs to be replanted, and not as one needing an attempt at in-filling
                                       Year after pruning
                    15t                2nd              3rd          ath
             May/              May/           May/            May/         May/
             June    Dec.      June Dec.      June Dec.       June Dec.    June
  Group 2                      Plant
    .       Uproot
                                                                           Prune
  fuuablo ෴ ලල —>                                          ik
                                   ———— Rehabilitate————yand
  l‘””‘             infested   ඇණ                                          Block:
   008 &            1065                                                   infill with
             g8
             8 ද                                                           tea
             €S
             £z
             38
             යු
             3e
             ¢ £
             g s                                                                  Sth             6th          7th
             &                                                                           May/           May/         May/
  —                                                                               066.   june Dec. June Dec. 11106
    e                             Uproot        Plant
  Suitable       ස                6            oy Pt ඞු
                                                     ~~
  for                             infested     Grass    =ප
  re-planting                     patches               =


                                                                           Uproot the "1301               B
                                                                           restofthe ~ ~~ Rehabilitate
                                                                           tea           Grass.

Figure 1: Schedule of proposed field operations to control Upcountry Live-wood Termite


11 any 01 the ටට category fields, find suitable blocks for replanting, follow the programme for Group 1
fields.
Note: In five-year cycle estates, the period of rehabilitation of termite affected patches will be
extended by one year.

4. 2. Soil Amendments
Soil amendments such as reclaimable tea, neem oil cake and Alocasia (Habarala) could be
incorporated in termite infested tea lands at the rate of (i) reclaimable tea 400 g + neem oil cake
200 g or (i) Alocasia (Habarala) 2.6 kg per plant depending on the availability.



Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka
Talawakelle

                                                         COPYRIGHT

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, scanning or information storage and retrieval
system without the prior written permission from the Director, Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka, Talawakelle
