                     T.R.l.          ADVISORY                     CIRCULAR                                No.oM [l

Issued in: February 2024                                                                               Serial No. 09/24


        PROTECTION OF TEA FROM COLLAR AND BRANCH CANKER DISEASE
      (This Advisory Circular supersedes the Advisory Circular DM 6 Serial No 21/03 issued in September 2003 and
                       related previous Advisory Circulars and links with Advisory Circular PU 2)


1.     Introduction
The fungus Phomopsis theae attacks tea plants in immature new clearings (up to 8 years) and the
tender shoots of mature seedling teas and tea cultivars, in areas over 1200 m (4000 ft) in elevation. in
all cases, infection takes place during dry weather conditions.
Collar canker and bush dieback caused            by Fusarium    solani species complex       infects both young       and
mature bushes regardless of elevation.

2.     Symptoms      and Diagnosis

Those bushes that are infected at the collar start to show general yellowing of the entire foliage. These
symptoms become heightened with the onset of rains when they fail to recover, compared to an
adjacent healthy bush. Upon uprooting, such plants will show near complete or complete girdling at the
collar, depending on the intensity of yellowing. This could give the impression that the disease starts
with the rains.
Infection takes place through leaf scars, wounds or directly by penetration of the bark in plants, which
                                                                                                            a
are subjected to moisture stress. This is found to be more common in VP tea cultivars, which have
shallow rooting habit, or in plants growing in unsuitable soils. Similarly, poorly developed nursery  plants
having weak (001 systems are also prone to attack. Infections over a large area is uncommon unless
the area has poor, gravelly or clayey soil with underlying slab rock or unless very susceptible tea
cultivars are used. Infections are usually sporadic and occasional, and patchy infections are a rarity.

Cankers caused        by F. solani species complex cause premature leaf yellowing and leaf fall followed by
thinning of branches. Flowering and fruiting are common               on infected bushes    Irregular canker is found
at the collar region. Older cankers have raised margin. Crakes and peeling off of the bark appear at the
collar region at soil level or just below. The exposed cambium and wood were discolored giving a tan,
brown or black color. Bushes die gradually.

 3.     Control of Collar and Branch Cankers

An integrated system of control has been found to 06 the most suitable. These will have to be invariably
combined with measures to conserve soil moisture during dry weather periods. The following measures
are recommended to raise plants, which can withstand infection.

 3.1 Cultural Methods

 (a)    Nursery Practices

        It is necessary to raise healthy and uniformly        grown    plants   in the nursery.   To   achieve    this, the
        following measures are recommended.

             «   Discourage use of cultivars KEN 16/3, K 145, TRI 2024, TRI 2142, TRI 3020,                      TRI 4067,
                 TRI 3073, TRI 3072 for the drier areas where Phomopsis canker is a problem

             «    Acultivar response is not prominent in collar canker and dieback caused by F. solani.

             «    Strictly adhere to standard planting materials.
 (b)   Field Practices

       Land Selection
       Avoid planting in unsuitable lands in steep          and   rocky areas,     in areas   with   underlying   slab    rock,
       ravines and in areas with poor drainage.

       During Rehabilitation
               *   Examine   the grass during the drought and            mark   out the areas   where    the grass       is not
                   growing satisfactorily, particularly in patches.

               *   Determine whether such poor growth is due to underlying slab rock or poor soil by digging a
                   pit.

               *   Having determined    the cause of the poor growth of grass, either ameliorate it or diversify
                   into grass.

       During Field Planting

              *    ॥ [5 important to prepare correct-size     planting    holes and follow up by correct planting,           to
                   encourage a well distributed root system
              *    Thatch the clearing with loppings of Mana, Guatemala or Eragrostis curvula

           *       Avoid deep planting and accumulation of soil at base after planting.

       Post-planting Operations
       Apply fertilizer correctly, as recommended (see Advisory Circular SP 2)

           *       Protect the plants against blister blight until maturity Entry of Phomopsis            can take place
                   through wounds caused by stem infections due to blister blight.

           *       If any cankers are noticed, remove the branch just below the canker as soon as they are
                   noticed.

          *        Thatch all new clearings adequately.

3.2 Chemical Methods
As infection is always sporadic, prophylactic treatment of all plants in a clearing is not advocated
                                                                                                          to
prevent possible infection on a small number of plants. However, it has been observed that the fields,
which receive adequate controlling in blister blight, by way of fungicides, particularly the systemic ones,
10 record less incidence of collar canker.
Drench the canker infected bushes with a recommended systemic fungicide at 0.05% at 2 - 4 weeks'
intervals based on severity (2-4 application is required, see refer Advisory Circular PU2).

Plants showing general yellowing of the foliage and dieback to be uprooted and burnt
                                                                                     in situ.

Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka
Talawakelle

                                                    COPYRIGHT
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
                                                                                                            means,
electronic or mechanical, including Pphotocopying, recording, scanning or information storage and
                                                                                                  retrieval system
without the prior written permission from the Director, Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka, Talawakelle
