                  T.R.l.          ADVISORY                    CIRCULAR                       No.PT6 |

Issued in : March 2004                                                             Serial No: 1/04


                                  MOISTURE LEVELS OF BLACK TEA
                       (This replaces the Advisory Circular No. T7, Serial No. 2/81)

 The most important factor that determines the keeping qualities of tea is the moisture
 content. At high moisture levels the deterioration of the desirable tea characteristics is
faster and these teas are found to lose briskness with time and end up as flat teas. The
moisture content of tea could be kept within the desired limits by the following:

 i)         Proper drying of tea.
 ॥)         Preventing excessive moisture absorption during grading and,
iii)        Packing tea in proper containers such as plywood tea chests                    lined    with
            aluminium foil or multiwall paper sacks.

The moisture content of properly fired dhools when sampled at the drier mouth should
be in the region of 3% and that of the tea at the time of packing should preferably be less
than 5%.

In order to dry tea properly, the following operating conditions are recommended for the
ECP Drier and the Fluid Bed Drier (FBD):

 ECP

       ඛූ) Inlet air temperature 01 190 -195 °F (88 - 91°C).
       b)   Exhaust air temperature - recorded by a thermometer placed one-third the length
            awoay from feed end and 6 inches (15.2 cm) above top tray of 125-135 °F (52 ~~
            57°C).
       c)   Residence time (i.e. time through the drier) of 21 minutes.
       d)   Air volume 01 30 cfm per [0 (1.87 cubic meters per minute per kg) moisture
            evaporated per hour, with uniform distribution over the top tray.
       e)   By-pass valve at fully closed position.
       f)   Adjustment 01 feed rate so as [ට maintain recommended exhaust temperature.
       g)   The fall through of tea should be minimized by having suitable tray perforations.



       a)   Inlet air temperature of 260 °F (127°C).
       b)   Height 01 discharge weir in drier at 3 % - 4 inches (8.9 - 10 cm).
       6)   Tea bed temperature near discharge end (recorded by a thermo probe immersed
            in the tea bed and mounted 6 to 8 inches (15.2 — 20.3 cm) from the discharge
            weir of the drying chamber) at 190-200 °F (88 -~ 93°C).
       d)   Air volume      of 2000-2500   cfm   (56.6 — 71   cubic meters   per minute)   per drying
            section.
       e)   Volume      control dampers    adjusted   so as to get well fluidized tea bed          in all
            sections and,
       1)   Adjustment 01 feed rate so as to maintain the recommended tea bed temperature
            near discharge end.
The absorption of certain amount of moisture by tea prior to and during grading as well
as packing is inevitable but care should be taken to prevent excessive gain. One of the
first precautions to be taken is to maintain the grading and packing rooms in a
reasonably dry condition. Tea should be graded daily and must not be left exposed
longer than necessary. Un-graded teas should not be left lying about in heaps but should
be stored in covered boxes. Graded teas should be binned as soon as possible.

The determination of moisture content of dhool samples and invoice samples should be
carried out as බූ routine and records should be maintained. The methods of determining
moisture content of tea and calibration of the Infra-red Moisture Meter are given in
another Advisory Circular.


The Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka
Talawakelle.

Copyright — The Tea Research Institute 01 Sri Lanka © 2004

                                           COPYRIGHT

All rights reserved.   No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or
information storage and retrieval system without permission in writing form the Director,
The Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka.
