                      T.R.l.          ADVISORY                 CIRCULAR                             No.PA

Issued in: January 2011                                                                     Serial No. 02/11


                               DROUGHT MITIGATION IN TEA PLANTATIONS
             (This circular cancels the circular No. PA 2 serial No. 2/01 issued in January 2001)

Drought is a serious environmental     hazard. Its damage to cultivated crops has become frequent in the
recent past and tea is no exception. Most of the tea growing regions in Sri Lanka receive rains from both
north-east and south-west monsoons. However, tea plantations are adversely affected by moisture stress
conditions due to uneven distribution of rainfall within the year. The main dry period in most of the tea
growing    regions extends from early January to about late March.     However, those areas which       receive
mainly the north-east monsoon rains, viz. Uva and some parts 01 the Low and Mid country, have the rmain
dry period generally extending from late June to about early September.


During these dry months, considerable damage can be caused to both young and mature tea, with extensive
casualties being observed in young clonal tea during their first and the second year after planting. In order
to minimize such damage and ensure early recovery, the following precautionary measures need to be
adopted prior to, and following, a drought. The drought effects differ with the growth stage of tea that is
whether it is young tea (before first pruning) or mature tea (after first pruning). Hence drought mitigation
measures also should vary according to the stage of growth of the tea.

1. New clearings - tea before the first proper prune

   1.1 Measures to be adopted before and during drought
          1.1.1 Muiching
               The inter-rows of new clearings should be thatched with Guatemala or Mana grass well before
               the monsoon tails off. For this purpose, about 37.5 metric tons per hectare (15 tons per acre)
               fresh material would   be required. This could be obtained from    a single lopping   from one
               hectare of well-tended grass clearing. Partially decomposed waste materials such as sawdust,
               paddy husk and refuse tea can be used (at the rate of 15 - 20 tons/ ha) for mulching. They can
               be applied as a layer 1" - 2" thick, leaving about 6" - 8" from the base of the tea plants. If
               paddy husk or saw dust are used, they should be mixed or sprayed with urea at the rate of 2
               - 3 kg per 100 kg of material. Mulching should be repeated 2 - 3 times a year depending on the
               rate of decomposition of the material used.


          1.1.2 Weed control
               New clearings should be kept free of weeds during drought. Hence, weeding program should
               be completed before the onset of the drought. If weeds are present during the drought, they
               can be slashed down to minimize competition for soil moisture. As plants are under moisture
               stress, spraying of any herbicide during drought is not recommended.


          1.1.3 Spraying of Sulphate of potash (SOP) or Muriate of potash (MOP) and Kaolin
               In order to reduce transpiration by the leaves, 2% SOP    or 2%   MOP   can be sprayed    (at the
               rate of 2 kg/ ha in 100 L of water during 1* year, 4 kg/ ha 200 L of water during 2 year and 8
               kg/ hain 400 L of water during 3" year) using a knapsack sprayer. Spraying should commence
               at least a month prior to the onset of drought and continue at 2 - 4 week intervals depending
               on the severity of drought. Urea can also be mixed (2 kg/ ha) with SOP or MOP to enhance K
         absorption. In plucking fields, spraying should be done immediately after harvesting of flush
         to ensure proper deposition of spray droplets on mature foliage. Drenching of foliage should
         be avoided since the drip would cause leaf scorch.


         Spraying of Kaolin (5 - 10 kg of Kaolin in 100 L of water) on to the leaves of young tea planis
         reduces heat and water loss by transpiration. Spraying should be done soon after drought 5615
         in.


   1.1.4 Irrigation
         If water is available, irrigate first year plants at 4 - 7 day intervals with 400 - 500 mi/ plant/
         application. The volume should be doubled for the second year plants irrigating them at 7 - 10
         day intervals.


   1.1.5 Skiffing
         If the drought is prolonged and the plants remained wilted in the morning hours, young tea in
         their second 10 fourth year from planting can be partially defoliated by giving a light skiff 10
         remove the top most 2" - 3" of foliage.

   1.1.6 Fertilizer application
         Fertilizer applications should be avoided during dry weather.


   1.1.7 Green manure crops
         SALT hedge rows and other green manure          crops inter-planted with tea should be lopped.
         Cover-crops should be cut back to ground level before the onset of a drought.


   1.1.8 Pest Control
         Mites, tea tortrix, nettle grubs are the common dry weather pests. Outbreaks of dry weather
         pests can cause considerable damage 10 tea plants (Please refer TRI Advisory Circulars on
         pest control for their management).


1.2 Measures to be adopted following a drought
   1.2.1 Fertilizer application
         Young tea fertilizers should be applied only after the plants have fully recovered from moisture
         stress and once the new leaves of defoliated plants are fully opened.


   1.2.2 Bringing into bearing and plucking
         Bringing into bearing should be done selectively and only after the plants have fully recovered
         from moisture stress and the severely affected plants have fully refoliated. Second to fourth
         year plants in plucking should be harvested only after they have fully recovered from moisture
         stress and resumed flushing. Light plucking (Mother-leaf plucking) should be resorted to during
         the first few months.

         Bushes which are severely affected by drought (defoliated) should be rested until they form a
         healthy canopy.


   1.2.3 Resupplying
         It 15 necessary 10 give priority for resupplying the vacancies before undertaking any normal
         replanting programme scheduled for the year. |! drought casualties are found in isolated patches,
                                                   2
           it is important to identify reasons. If soil is found to be unsuitable i.e. very shallow or gravelly,
           resupplying can 06 done in trenches (30 cm wide and 45 cm deep) which had been filled with
           compost and allowed to settle for sometime.

2. Mature Tea

  2.1 Measures to be adopted before and during drought
     2.1.1 Plucking
           It is recommended that light plucking (Mother-leaf plucking) be practiced during the drought.


     2.1.2 Spraying of Sulphate of Potash (SOP) or Muriate of Potash (MOP)
           In order to mitigate    drought    damage   in mature    tea   by reducing   water losses through
          transpiration, particularly in drought prone areas, foliar application of SOP or MOP           prior to
           anticipated drought, is recommended. A 2% solution of SOP or 2% solution of MOP              (8 kg in
           400 L of water/ ha) to be applied using a knapsack sprayer at fortnight intervals, commencing
           at least one month prior to the onset of drought and continue at 2 - 4 week intervals depending
           on the severity of drought. 2%      Urea (8 kg/ ha) can also be mixed with SOP or MOP 19
           enhance K absorption. Spraying should be done immediately after harvesting to ensure proper
          deposition on mature foliage. Drenching of foliage should be avoided since the drip would
          cause leaf scorch.

     2.1.3 Skiffing
           If bushes show symptoms of wilting in the moming, they can be partially defoliated by giving
           a light skiff 10 remove the topmost 2" - 3" of foliage (below the kolunthu mudichchu).


     2.1.4 Pruning
          As a rule, pruning should (101 be carried out just prior to or during a drought. Dry weather
           pruning can result in extensive bush debilitation.


     2.1.5 Forking
          This operation should be avoided during or just prior to the onset of a drought as it would
          accelerate loss of soil moisture.

     2.1.6 Weeding
           Fields should be kept free of. weeds during a drought. Hence, the weeding programme should
           be completed before the onset of drought. If weeds are present during drought, they can be
          slashed down to minimize competition with the tea for soil moisture. Spraying of herbicides
          during dry weather is not recommended.

     2.1.7 Green manure crops and grasses
          All SALT hedge rows and rehabilitation grasses planted in vacant patches in mature tea lands
          should be lopped prior 10 a drought.


     2.1.8 Pest control
          Mites, tea tortrix, nettle grubs are the common dry weather pests. Outbreaks of dry weather
           pests can cause considerable damage 10 tea bushes (Please refer to TRI Advisory Circulars
          on pest control series for their management).
   2.2    Measures to be adopted following a drought
         2.2.1 Fertilizer application
              Mature tea bushes affected by drought should be fertilized only after they have fully recovered
              from   moisture stress, i.e. when   bushes commence     flushing.   It is also imperative that the
              fertilizer application for defoliated bushes is delayed until they have fully refoliated and the
              first set of new leaves are fully expanded.


         2.2.2 Plucking
               In any given field the tea bushes are subjected to varying degrees of drought damage. Light
               plucking (Mother-leaf plucking) should be adopted until such time that flushing resumes its
               normal periodicity.


         2.2.3 Pruning
               Pruning of drought affected fields should be delayed until the bushes have fully recovered
               and produced sufficient foliage. It is also best 10 rest drought affected fields until adequate
               root reserves have been accumulated.

         2.2.4 Resupplying vacancies
               Having infilled the new clearing areas, the best 01 the remaining nursery plants should te
               used 10 supply vacancies in mature tea fields. Vacancies in seedling tea should be planted
               with an appropriate soil reconditioning grass and infilled after a lapse of two years.


3. Other considerations
   All grass clearings must be lopped prior 10 a drought 10 prevent fire hazards. However, shade trees
   should not be lopped during dry weather.


The Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka
Talawakelle

                                                  COPYRIGHT

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or information storage and retrieval,
without. permission in writing from the Director, Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka.
