                       T.R.l.         ADVISORY                    CIRCULAR                          No.SP




Issued in: May 2009                                                                        Serial No. 01/09


                                                  SoiL AnaLYsIS
                (This Circular cancels Advisory Circular No. S3, Serial No. 5/84, issued in 1984)

1. Introduction
   Nutrient status of soil can be determined by soil analysis. The corrective measures to amend or
   improve nutrient deficiencies can be based on results of such analysis. However, soil analysis only
   may not be adequate (ට make recommendations as there are several other factors that govern the
   availability of nutrients.


   Soil analysis may be resorted to, when        it is suspected that the soil is the primary cause for poor
   performance of tea bushes. Other factors such as fertilizer application, cultural practices, etc. should
   have been correctly adhered to. Under such circumstances, a complete analysis of sail is likely to
   reveal the factor which causes poor growth.

   For Site Specific Fertilizer Recommendation (SSFR), soil analyses are compulsory because SSFR
   mainly depends on soil nutrient status.


   For soil analysis to be reliable for decision making, soil should have been sampled correctly. Therefore,
   due regard must be paid to the sampling procedure outlined below.


2. Sampling for nutrient analysis
   The collection, preparation and delivery of a soil sample are important steps in the analytical operation.
   2.1 Time of sampling
         For the estimation of soil pH levels and/or nutrient status, sampling should be carried out after
        ඛූ minimum       period of 6 weeks following the last ground    fertilizer application. At the time of
         sampling, soil should be relatively moist. Sampling should be avoided during severe drought
        and heavy rainfall seasons. In the case of SSFR, representative soil samples should be obtained
        annually to determine the nutrient status. Samples for SSFR can be obtained during March/
        April     and September/October from the South-West quarter, and during September/October,
        from the North-East quarter.


   2.2 Tools and the procedure
        The ordinary post-hole auger is the best sampling tool. Its combined cutting and digging edge
         makes it most serviceable for general use even on hard ground. The stem should be marked
         at intervals of 15 cm (6 inches) so that the depth of sampling can be ascertained at a glance.
         Except in gravely areas, it is possible to sample up to a depth of 60 cm (24 inches) with the
         above     soil auger,   if necessary. As an alternative, the alavangoe   normally used for digging
         planting holes is satisfactory for the purpose. For collecting soil from depths below the reach of
         the soil auger, it is necessary to dig pits. For diagnostic purposes, sampling to a depth of    15 cm
         (6 inches) would be sufficient. The leaf litter on the soil surface (not incorporated in the soil)
                                                        1
       should be cleaned before sampling. While collecting soils from the second and lower depths
       with an auger, contamination of the samples with the top soil can be minimized by lightly
       scraping the outer part of the soil core with a knife.


2.3 Technique of sampling
       One of the most important aspects of soil testing is the technique of obtaining a soil sample
       that is representative of the area. The errors in sampling a field are generally greater than the
       errors in laboratory analysis. The size of the area from which one sample may be taken varies
       greatly, but usually ranges from 2 to 10 hectares (5 to 25 acres). A field may be marked into
       blocks depending on the area, topography, drainage, past cultural practices, etc. Areas that
       vary in appearance,     slope,   drainage,   soil-type should   be sampled     separately   (Figure   1).
       Localized areas with extremely poor soil or crop growth should be marked               separately and
       sampled.

                                  Level land

                                            Very steep slope




                                                          Gentisisiops     Bottom Land




Figure 1. Demarcation of an area into blocks to obtain representative soil samples of the area
           (numbers within the circulars are blocks)


2.4 Numpber of samples
       Using the auger, a large number of core samples should be collected raridomly in a zigzag
       manner as shown       in Figure 2. It is advisable to take cores from points closer fo the plants
       where root activity is high, rather than the middle of the rows. Sampling should not be done
       near roads, paths, drains or other non-representative or abnormal areas. The number of soil
       cores to be taken would depend on the area which the composite soil sample is expected to
       represent.   Each   sample should contain soil from cores taken at several places in the field.
       This procedure is to maximize the influence of uniformity in the soil smaple. From small or
       experimental   plots, it would suffice to take about 10 cores. When          sampling a large field, it
       should first be divided into blocks of about 2 hectares (5 acres) and        15 to 20 cores should be
       taken from each block.
   *     1116 soil cores from each block should be coniected on an aluminium/plastic tray or a piece of
         polythene sheet or brown paper
   *     When soil is collected for trace element analyses, the tray should be lined with a polythene
         sheet
                                            Level land

                                                            Very steep slope



                                                                      Gravel area




  Figure 2. Soil sampling in a zigzag random manner to obtain a composite sample



       *   The soil should be thoroughly mixed, breaking-up any lumps and spread into a layer
       *   Small portions from the layers are taken at random and transferred into a clean polythene
           bag in order to provide a sub-sample of about 72 kilogram (1 Ib)
       *   The bag should be closed immediately by tying and labelled with a waterproof marking pen,
           giving details of location (estate, field and block), depth of sample, date etc. The samples
           should then be despatched to the laboratory without undue delay

3. Sample despatch
  The samples should be sent directly to the Head, Soils and Plant Nutrition Division, Tea Research
  Institute of Sri Lanka, Talawakelle or to the regional laboratories located at following addresses
  depending on the convenience for transport.
  *    Soils and Plant Nutrition Laboratory, Walahanduwa,    Galle
   *   Soils and Plant Nutrition Laboratory, Research, Advisory and Extension Centre, PO Box, 130,
       Hantana,   Kandy


   Itis necessary that the total cost of analysis should be paid prior to commencing analysis. Payments
   could be made through cheques, postal or money orders drawn in favour of “Tea Research Institute
   of Sri Lanka” and forward to the Head, Soils and Plant Nutrition Division, Tea Research Institute of
   Sri Lanka, Talawakelle or to the regional laboratories at Hantana, Kandy and Walahanduwa, Galle.
   Money could also be paid at the cash counter of the Tea Research Institute or its centres at the time
   of submission of samples for analysis.


                                             COPYRIGHT

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
nmeans, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or information storage and retrieval,
without permission in writing from the Director, Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka.
