                T.R.l.        ADVISORY                CIRCULAR                        881ක්‌2 |

Issued in: March 2003                                                 Serial No. 04/03

                                  Guidelines on Plucking


Introduction

Picking of young tea shoots having two to three leaves and soft dormant shoots (banjhi) is
known as plucking. Plucking is the most labour intensive field operation in tea plantations.
Hence, the profitability of tea plantations depends to a large extent on the harvesting
policies. Well-balanced plucking policy enhances the yield and optimises the labour use
without affecting the quality of made tea.

Shoot growth and shoot generations

The production and storing of food materials take place in all growing shoots and growth of
a bush depends on such food materials. Plucking removes a greater part 01 shoots that are
in the process of production. The degree of removal of growing shoots can affect the
growth and yield of a tea bush. In order to optimise the shoot growth, it is very essential to
understand the functions or the importance of different growing stages of a tea shoot.




                                   Bud




                                                                            Normal
                                                                            Leaves




               Fish Leaf   —»

               Scale Leaves                       80501 Leaf



                                                    \     Mother Leaf




                                    Tea Shoot
Growth of shoots

    e   After plucking, shoot growth starts from the axillary buds just below the point of
        plucking. There is a potential for a number of axillary buds to commence growth
        after apical growth is interrupted by plucking. But the first axillary bud immediately
        below the plucking point usually grows first.
    «   Initially, two small appendages known as scale leaves, which cover the bud, open
        out. They generally fall off few days after opening.       Then another one or two,
        medium sized, unsermrated, blunt leaves are unfolded above these scale leaves. The
        smaller one immediately above the scale leaves is termed janam leaf and the other
        one is called the fish leaf.
    *   Then the bud starts to produce normal leaves which are commonly included in the
        harvest.
    *   After unfurling 4-5 leaves, the terminal bud becomes inactive, and passes through a
        dormant (resting) period known as banjhi or wangi.
    *   1116 growth pattemn having altemate active and dormant growing phases 15 termed
        as periodicity of growth.
    «   Initiation of the axillary bud growth is rather slow. It enters into a fast growing period
        after unfurling   the janamlfish   leaf.   This   is generally   known   as   linear phase   of
        growth.
    *   Shoot weight, approximately, doubles at the opening of each extra leaf, on a shoot
        reaching the harvestable size, i.e. with 2-3 flush leaves.


Shoot generations

There are number of shoots of different growth stages in a tea bush. i.e. growing buds, bud
and scale leaves, bud and fish leaf, etc., A group of shoots of the same growth stage or age
is called a generation. The generations are formed as a result of variation in shoot growth
and frequent harvesting. Continuous plucking is possible as there are large number of
shoots belonging to different generations in a tea bush. The number of generations usually
increases with shortening of the plucking round. Increase in shoot generations helps to
increase the shoot population density, which 15 the major yield component

Growing buds and immature shoots (arimbus) on a plucking table are considered major
sites for storing carbohydrates (sink) produced by mature leaves (source).        Hence, it is
essential to ensure that the immature shoots are left on the bush after plucking.
Leaf standard (Plucking standard)

This refers 10 the composition of standard flush/leaf of the harvested crop.

Standard (acceptable) flush/leaf means;
     Shoots with two tender leaves & bud
    Immature dormant shoots
    Shoots with three tender leaves & bud

Immature shoots and coarse leaf are unacceptable.

             [         Percentage of standard flush                    Leaf Standard
             |                    More than 75%                        Fine Plucking
             ॥                       60- 75%                           Medium Plucking           1
             |                    Less than 60 %                       Coarse Plucking               |

Plucking coarse leaves will lead to drop in the quality of made tea.


Plucking style (Severity of plucking)

This refers to the point at which a shoot is plucked. The appropriate plucking style should
06 selected depending on the prevailing weather pattem, bush vigour and labour
availability.

A well-planned plucking policy with a combination of light and hard plucking during different
seasons, by maintaining a good canopy depth, should be carried out.

  Pluckipg style :                       Point of Plucking               Type of leaves left on the
  ($eventy of plucking)                                                  bush
 Light _Plucking or Single leaf          Just above the first mature   | One mature leaf, fish leaf &
  plucking or Mother leaf plucking     | leaf                            scale leaves.

  Hard Plucking or Fish leaf             Just above the fish leaf.       Fish leaf & scale leaves.
  plucking
 Plucking round/Frequency of plucking

 Plucking round is the number of days between successive plucking.

 An ideal plucking round is the number of days taken between                  successive openings of
 leaves on a shoot. This period is called leaf period or phyllochron.

          The rate of shoot growth depends on factors such as weather & type of clone.
          Plucking rounds become shorter during wet weather while it is extended during dry
          weather. Therefore, the plucking rounds should also be determined accordingly.
          Maintaining a proper plucking round that matches the rate of shoot growth helps to
          increase the yield and to minimize a drop in the quality of made tea.
          Haphazard extended plucking rounds may not only lower the made tea quality, but
          also reduce the yield.
          Plucking rounds and the plucking standards are independent factors.
          Extended rounds may influence the plucking standards due to high percentage of
          over-mature shoots.


Plucking and vigour of the bush

          The tea leaf attains the highest photosynthetic activity when they reach half their
          final size. It remains at the maximum for about 6 month from full expansion.
          Usually the life span of a tea leaf is about 18 months.

    This shows that the older leaves do not contribute to the production because production
    decreases with ageing of leaves. Therefore, addition of new foliage on the canopy by
    plucking to a mother leaf for about 6 months per year is required.

          Continuous mother leaf plucking leads to the unnecessary rise in the plucking table.
          Maintenance of a thick canopy (more than 25 cm) is not required, as leaves at the
          bottom layers of the canopy do not receive sufficient sunlight for photosynthesis.
          Depth   of maintenance foliage is less in young tea and in pruned tea. Hence,
          adoption of mother leaf plucking is necessary to build up adequate leaf canopy.
          Fish leaf plucking could be done during the cropping months, while resorting to
          mother leaf plucking during the balance periods is recommended.
          Hard plucking will give a higher yield initially, but continuous hard plucking will result
          in debilitation 01 the bush and an increase in the formation 01 mudichchies (crow's
          feet condition).

    Continuous hard plucking or light plucking systems will bring about fow productivity of
    the   bush.   It is therefore,   important   to   adopt   a   mixture    of two   plucking      systems
    depending on the prevailing weather condition in the area, the age from pruning and
    bringing into bearing practices.


Mechanical harvesting

Mechanical    harvesting   should    be sought   if the hand      plucking   is impractical   due     to the
scarcity of labour. Under such conditions TRI Selective Tea Harvester could be used.
  Other important aspects of plucking

 1)      Plucking table should be even and it should follow the slope of the land. 11115 should
         06 initiated from the time of pruning/tipping and continued with the bush creep.
 2)      Removal of banji and crow’s-feet should be a routine practice.
 3)      Immature shoots (animbus) must be left unplucked to be taken at the next round as
        heavier units.
 4)     Coarse leaves and stalks should be removed in the field to maintain a better leaf
        standard and a plucking table.

        Shoots on side branches and hollows on the plucking table should be left unplucked
        until they cover the open spaces.

         Pluckers should be instructed not to ram the flush into their baskets.

        Pluckers   should   be instructed   not to retain an excessive            number      of plucked
        shoots in their hands.

 8)     Plucking on the rested bushes       and   on the 'lungs' of pruned          bushes     should     be
        avoided.

 9)     Possible damages to plucked shoots           at   the     point   of   weighing,     bulking    and
        transporting should be minimized.

 10)    Education of pluckers and careful supervision on plucking will ensure the quality of
        made tea


The Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka
Talawakelle

Copy right - The Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka @ 2003


                                         COPY RIGHT

All ights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or
information storage and retrieval,    without permission        in writing from the Director,           Tea
Research Institute of Sri Lanka.
