                   T.R.I. ADVISORY CIRCULAR                                                       No.PN[EN

Issued in: November 2009                                                                    Serial No. 06/09

                                      Tea NURSERY MANAGEMENT

1. Introduction
   Nursery management is an most important operation for successful tea cultivation in the field. The
   success of tea plantation depends largely on the vigour and the quality of nursery plants used. The
   primary objective of nursery management is to raise healthy, vigorous and uniform plants from suitable
   cultivars with minimum casualties over an appropriate period of time at a minimum cost. A plant raised
   in the nursery of about 30 cm height comprising approximately 15 leaves with 2 - 3 side shoots, and a
   well developed root system is considered as suitable for planting. Good Nursery Practices (GNP) including
   advance planning, correct and timely implementation of nursery operations are essential to produce
   healthy and uniform plants in a nursery as described below.


2. Schedule of operations
   Nursery activities for different tea growing regions are shown in Table 1.

   Table 1. Nursery activity schedule for different planting regions/ monsoon sectors

   Activity                                                    Up country/      Uva/          Low country/
                                                               South-west ~ North-west         South-west
   Pruning mother bushes (4 - 6 months prior to planting)      Nov - Dec        May - Jul     Apr - May
   Soil collection, preparation, fumigation and bagging        Feb - Mar        Jul - Aug     Jul - Aug
   Planting of cuttings                                        May - Jun        Nov-Dec       Aug - Sep
   Supplying casualties (2 weekly intervals)                   Jun - Aug        Dec-Jan        Sep- Oct
   Fertilizer application (2 weekly intervals)                 Aug - Sep        Jan-Feb        Oct- Nov
   Disbudding (4 - 5 leaf stage)                               Aug - Sep        Feb-Mar        Nov - Dec
   Thumb nailing (7 - 8 leaf stage)                            Sep - Oct        Mar - Apr     Dec - Jan
   Restacking (4 - 5 month stage)                              Oct - Nov        Apr-May         Dec-Jan
   Hardening (5 - 7 month stage)                               Dec - Jan        May - Jun      Mar - Apr
   Field planting Up country & Uva: in 10 - 12 months          May - Jun        Oct- Nov       Apr-Jun
   Low country: in 8 - 9 months

3. Selection of site
   ‘A nursery site must be centrally located to facilitate easy and constant supervision. The size of the site
   depends on the annual requirement of plants and the lie and slope of the land. Factors to be considered.
   in the selection of a site are;
   *   Proximity [ට a source of water
   * Good drainage
   * Protection from wind
   *   Proximity to the source of soil
   *   Proximity to the source of planting material
   * Absence of over hanging branches of trees

4. Preparation of beds
   The ideal size of a bed should be about 1.0 m wide (3.5 ft) and could be of any convenient length of
   about 20 m (65 ft), with a pathway of 60 cm (2 ft) on either side for carrying out nursery operations. Beds
   are built in පූ north-south direction to receive sunlight throughout the day. The beds should be raised to

                                                      1
 about 15 cm (6 inches) for helping drainage and to avoid contamination of bags with nematodes
 subsequently through running water and, to avoid possible operational damages to the plants.

. Selection 01 5011
 The growth of nursery plants largely depends on the texture (the proportion 01 sand, silt and clay) of the
 soil. Loamy soils containing sufficient fine particles (clay and silt) to hold up water together with sand to
 facilitate excess water to drain out are suitable for nurseries. The pH of the soil should be within a range
 of 4.5 and 5.5, preferably around 5 for successful rooting and growth. The soils chosen for bagging
 should be sieved using a No. 4 mesh to remove stones, pebbles and large root particies. The sources
 of soil suitable for nurseries are as follows.

 5.1 Grass soil
     A soil where Guatemala or Mana grass has been grown for a period of year or two with a substantial
     amount of un-decomposed roots that make the soil friable with good drainage and adequate aeration.

  5.2 Patana soil
     Soil collected from patna lands where grasses, ferns and shrubs have grown naturally.


  5.3 Jungle soil
      Soil with suitable texture from natural jungles, Eucalyptus or Pinus plantations/blocks can be used.
     The surface organic matter (decaying leaves and twigs) should be removed prior to (156.


  5.4 Sub soil
      This 15 obtained from a depth beyond 30 cm from the soil surface. After sieving (with No. 4 mesh),
      its texture should be improved by adding fine sand proportionately (one part of fine sand with four
      to six parts of soil depending on clayiness of the soil).


. Soil treatment
  Soil should not be collected for nursery when it is too wet or dry in order to preserve the desired
  structure. Soil collected should be heaped in an enclosed area and protected from rain by thatching/
  covering until it is used.

  Soils collected from all tea growing areas should be fumigated before use to eradicate nematode pests
  in soil. Please refer Advisory Circular No PM 11 for current recommendations of the fumigants, dosages
  and application methods.


  As an alternative to soil fumigation, soil solarization is also possible in areas where at least five hours
  of sunshine per day is available for a minimum period of six consecutive weeks. As solarization is
  subjective to local conditions it is necessary to obtain advice on soil solarization methods from the TRI
  by submitting weather records such as the number of rainy days and daily sunshine hours for the last
  three years.


. Alternate soil media
  When soil is scarce, organic materials such as tea waste, paddy husk and coir dust may be used along
  with soil. These alternate media will also help improve the quality and vigour of nursery plants. Other
  comparative benefits include reduction of soil requirement, labour use and cost and easy transportation
  due to the light weight of such materials.
 7.1 Organic materials
     Organic materials with the following requirements should be selected depending on their accessibility
     and availability.

     Organic material                Specifications and requirements
     Refuse tea                      Well decomposed under natural conditions
     Paddy husk                      Fresh or partially decomposed; wastes obtained preferably from
                                     Japanese huller and free of bran and grain pieces
     Coir dust                       Fresh or decomposed; not from coastal areas


  7.2 Methods of use
     Different alternate media could be used either.in layer arrangement or as mixtures. The soil used
     for layers and/or mixtures should be fumigated as specified in the Advisory Circular No. PM 11.
     The organic material and soil should be lightly watered and mixed thoroughly prior to making the
     mixture.

     7.2.1 Layer arrangement
             The top one-third (1/3) of the nursery bag should be filled with soil to facilitate early rooting
             with minimum causalities. The bottom two-third (2/3) should be filled with a mixture of organic
             material and soil in the ratios given below which will help establish roots and growth.

             Organic material       Ratio of organic material : soil          Remarks
             Refuse tea                        1:1                       100% refuse tea could also be used
             Paddy husk                        1:10r1:2                  1 : 2 for areas where prolonged dry
                                                                         weather is expected
             Coir dust                         1:1                       100% coir dust could also be used

     7.2.2 Mixture arrangement
             The whole nursery bag should be filled with 1 : 1 refuse tea: soil or 1 : 1 paddy husk: soil or
             1 : 1 coir dust: soil mixtures.

 7.3 Special considerations
     Special attention should be paid to give optimum water requirement when using the above growing
     media. As paddy husk retains less water, frequent watering may be required whereas refuse tea
     requires less water as it retains more water.


. Filling the polythene sleeves
  Guage of the polythene should be 150. Standard size of a sleeve is 10 cm or
                                                                            4 inches in diameter (12.7
 cm or 5 inches layflat) and 23 cm or 9 inches long and, about 400 such sleeves can be made from 1 kg
 of polythene sleeve of 150 gauge. The bottom end of the bag is left open, and a few holes punched on
 the sides of the bottom half to facilitate drainage. About one cube of soil is required to fill about 1000
 sleeves.

  Bigger polythene sleevs of 30 ¢cm or 12 inches long and 15 cm or 6 inches wide (layflat) are used to
  raise bigger plants for infilling purposex as they are kept longer duration (15 - 18 months) in the
  nursery.
 When filling the sleeves, a small layer of lightly wet 501 15 gently rammed at the bottom to make it hold
 on to the sleeve. Then fill by gently pressing the soil in but not ramming it hard, to avoid formation of a
 hard layer that may impede root development. No air pockets should be left in the soil while filling as it
 could result in sagging of the bag.

. Source of planting material
  Vegetatively propagated plants are raised from internodal cuttings consisting of one leaf of the shoot.
  The choice of cultivars, both for replanting and infilling, will depend on the desired characters. Please
  refer TRI Advisory Circular PN 1 for details on selecting suitable cultivars. Cuttings should be obtained
 from properly managed multiplication plots (mother bushes) as described below.


 9.1 Preparation of mother bushes and planting of cuttings
     It is recommended to remove the terminal buds, about 2 - 3 weeks before taking shoots off the
     mother bushes and then followed by a foliar application of Zinc Sulphate and Urea at 2 - 3% each
     in order to break dormancy 01 axillary buds and stimulate growth. Please refer TRI Advisory Circular
     No. SP 4 for details on fertilizing mother bushes.

 9.2 Collection of shoots
     Shoots must be obtained from pruned bushes over four years in age. Vigorously grown erect shoots
     will be available for collection about four months after pruning in the low country and six months
     after pruning in the up country. However, this period may vary with weather conditions, elevation
     and cultivar. Generally 3 - 5 suitable cuttings per shoot (depending on the quality of shoot) and 15
     - 25 shoots could be obtained from a well maintained mother bush. Approximately 70 - 100 cuttings
     could be obtained from a bush. Shoots should be collected early in the day.




                                 rejected apical
                                 tender portion




                                                   semi hard wood middle portion
                                                     suitable for taking cuttings



      A suitable shoot                                                                 rejected basal
                                                                                      mature portion
      Figure 1: Selection of suitable portions for taking single node cuttings

                                                     4
9.3 Transportation of shoots
    Once shoots are removed from mother bushes they should be kept in a shaded place preferably in
    a container filled with water to avoid drying up. Adequate measures should therefore be taken to
    minimize drying up and sun scorch of shoots during transportation.

9.4 Method of taking cuttings
   Only single node cuttings from a suitable shoot (Figure 2) are recommended. Cuttings should
                                                                                                      be
   taken from the middle portion (Figure 1) of the shoot. leaving the apical tender portion and the basal
   mature portion (Figure 1). Cuttings with axilliary flower buds, overgrown shoots and damaged
                                                                                                  mother
   leaf (Figure 3) should be discarded. When obtaining single node cuttings, the
                                                                                       upper cut should




  cut sloping upwards just
  above the axillary bud            *



                                              2.5 - 3.8 20

  cut sloping downwards ———
                          ,

  Figure 2. A suitable single node cutting




  3E damaged mature leaf                  overgrown axillary bud                  flower bud




     stem too short                          stem too long              excess stem ahead the leaf

 Figure 3. Unsuitable cuttings
      always be made in the shoot closer to the axilliary bud without damaging it (Figure 2). The second
      cut should be made 2.5 - 3.8 cm below the node, in an upward slope by rotating the shoot between
      fingers. The cuttings should be dropped into a water container immediately after the cut and planted
      soon as possible without leaving them to dry out.


  9.5 Planting of cuttings
      Soil in the polythene bags should be lightly watered and gently pressed prior to inserting cuttings.
      Only one cutting should be planted per bag by inserting vertically down into the soil. Planting of
      cuttings should be done in the manner the leaves are oriented in one direction at an angle ට the
      row. The soil around the cutting should be gently pressed by fingers to ensure firm anchorage.
      Cuttings of different cultivars should be planted separately and labeled.

  9.6 Promotion of rooting of cuttings
      In order to enhance callusing and rooting 01 cuttings particularly in the case of slow rooting cultivars,
      the basal ends of the cuttings may be treated with a quick dip of a growth hormone by immersing
      the cuttings up 19 1.5 cm in Indol Butric acid (IBA) solution of 6000 ppm (69 IBA/L of water).


  9.7 Propagation under sealed polythene
      Propagation could be done under a sealed polythene tunnel to have considerable savings on water
      and labour. After cuttings are planted, the bags as well as beds are given a through watering and
      covered immediately with a transparent, 300 gauge polythene sheet, resting on semi-circular iron
      or bamboo hoops. The edges of the sheet are buried well on all four sides and made air-tight to
      create a propagating environment.

      No watering is required in the tent as the water applied initially would be adequate for internal
      circulation within the tent. |! the moisture in the tent is inadequate, the plants should be watered and
      sealed again. When the water is condensed inside the tent, they should be placed back in the
      potted bags by gently tapping the surface of the tent at frequent intervals especially in the mornings.

      The cover could be retained for 1"/, - 3 months, depending on the rate of growth, and removed in
      stages extending over a few days. This system brings about a relatively fast vegetative growth of
      the cuttings, especially in slow-growing cultivars as well as in nurseries in exposed or cold areas.


10. Shade for nurseries
   Cuttings should not be exposed to direct sunlight and diffused or indirect sunlight of about 20 - 25%
   light is adequate. The different types of nursery shade are described below.


   10.1Low shade with bracken fern
       Bracken fern (Gleichenia linearis) can be inserted in clusters of about 2 - 3 fern shoots between
       polythene sleeves. The fern stalk should be free from leaves up to 25 cm from bottom and shade
       should be provided by the fern canopy above this height. Uneven shading and difficulty in supervision
       are drawbacks of this type of shade.


   10.2Low shade with coir matting
       Coir matting of 6mm mesh, with a standard size of 9 m x 3 m (30" x 9") is laid on a frame of iron
       or bamboo hoops, fixed across the length of the bed at 2 m apart. Rods, 2 m long with loops at the
       end, are used to link the hoops together and provide additional support.
   10.3High shade with coir matting
       Though the initial cost is high, this type of shade is preferred as it allows easy walking in and
       carrying out nursery operations under the permanent structure. The frame (wood, galvanized
       piping or concrete posts) is erected slightly sloping to receive more of the morning sunlight, and
       also to prevent excessive drip during heavy rains. Posts are 2.4 m high, spaced 3.5 m x 3.5 m
       apart, and the frame stands 2 m above the bed after erecting. Coir matting of 6mm mesh shouid
       be used as shade material. Alternatively synthetic nettings could be used in high elevation estates.

11. Aftercare operations
   11.1 Watering
        In the early stages, regular watering two to three times a day is necessary and watering should be
        regulated depending on the weather. Wetting the coir matting will help retention of moisture in the
        nursery.

   11.2 Fertilizer applications
        Fertilizer should be applied only after the cuttings have been rooted, which would be between six
        to eight weeks in the Low country and ten to tweive weeks in the Up country. Please refer
        Advisory Circular No. SP 1 for details of fertilizer application.

   11.3 Restacking plants
        For easy management of the nursery and to obtain plants uniform in size, the plants should be
        separated by restacking them into two to three height classes during the fourth to fifth month. A
        second restacking could be done during the fifth to seventh month. While restacking, the moss
        and hard crust formed in the surface soil of the nursery bags should be loosened by gently dibbling
        in with a pointed stick to permit better percolation of water and fertilizer. This leaves the soil in a
        friable condition.

   11.4 Hardening of plants
        As more leaves are formed, plants need exposure to more sunlight for better growth. This must
        be done gradually as sudden exposure may lead to leaf scorch. Between the fourth and sixth
        month (based on the elevation), the side of the coir matting should be raised and the plants
        should be exposed to indirect sun until the shade is completely removed.


   11.5 Encouraging early spread
        For maximum gain, plants should be encouraged to form a low spread at an early stage. The
        following operations would encourage formation of lateral branches from the lower level of the
        main stem.

        Disbudding: To induce effective lateral branching, the terminal bud should be removed at four
        to five leaf stage. This should be repeated on the axillary shoots also as they grow.


        Thumb-nailing: At about seventh to eighth leaf stage, after the root system is well developed,
        the terminal bud and the two leaves immediately below should be pinched off to induce growth of
        lateral branches.

    11.6 Pest and disease control
        Common pests found in nurseries are the tea tortrix and the yellow mite. When the nursery period
        is extended, shot hole borer can become a problem in susceptible cultivars. Mealy bugs may

                                                      7l
        become problematic under ill-drained and clayey soil conditions. Blister blight and black blight
        disease (in the Low country) on young leaves during monsoon condition also can be a problem.
        Please refer TRI PM and DM series of Advisory Circulars for current recommendations on control
        of insect and mite pests and, leaf diseases in nurseries.


        With proper timing of operations along with good management practices, nursery tea plants with
        appropriate quality standards can be produced within a period of 10 - 12 months in Up country
        and Uva regions, and 8 - 9 months in Low country regions.




                                              COPYRIGHT
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or information storage and retrieval,
without permission in writing from the Director, Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka.
