                    T.R.l.      ADVISORY                CIRCULAR                         No.PAIER



Issued in: September 2003                                                   Serial No. 19/03


                           INFILLING VACANCIES IN TEA FIELDS

               (This Advisory Circular replaces Circular No. E2, Serial No. 2/92)

1.   Introduction

"Infilling' is a cultural operation undertaken in tea lands to replace those bushes that die
due to various causes, with new healthy and robust plants so as to give a uniform cover
and thereby, maximise productivity. Death of plants occur periodically in tea fields due
to unfavorable climatic conditions, lightening, soil variability, pest and disease attack,
drastic   cultural operations such as hard pruning and competition from neighbouring
plants.   If the dead or weak plants are not replaced on time, productivity of the field will
decline and uitimately become uneconomic. The presence of vacant patches in tea
fields may also lead to the deterioration of the soil due to erosion and collapse of soil
structure.    Infilling should be carried out continuously    (at every prune) in order to
maintain productivity at the highest possible level. Provision should be made each year
for the envisaged infilling program which would be based on the area to be pruned and
the percent vacancies. The cost of infilling could be recovered in the first cycle of the
infills depending on the price of made tea.

2. Selection of areas for Infilling

For purposes of infilling, fields could be classified into three groups based on their
performance.

Group 1: Fields to be replanted in the near future (within next:2-3 cycles)
Group 2: Fields not earmarked for replanting in the near future- (flonger than 2-3 ¢ycles)
Group 3: Fields with poor, steep and rocky areas earmarked:-for diversification away
           from tea.

It will be clear that no useful purpose will be served by infiling vacancies in Groups       1
and 3. Attention should therefore be focussed on Group 2.

Fields to 06 infilled should   be selected two years prior to pruning and the         weak
(passengers) bushes in the periphery of the vacant patches must be uprooted. The
causes for the weakness of such plants must be identified and appropriate remedial
measures adopted to correct them.        Thereafter, the patch should be planted with
Mana/Guatemala/Vetiver grass till the field 15 ready for pruning. Infilling with new plants
of high yielding or compatible cultivars can be undertaken               after prune. Soil
amelioration/reconditioning under grass would improve the soil and also prevent weed
growth. The grass should be lopped periodically and the loppings used as thatch insitu.

Infilling could be carried out in small patches or large blocks. The smaller patches may
contain single or multiple infills.
3. Time of Infilling

Infilling vacancies could be easily carried out in pruned fields. Pruning in fields due for
large scale infilling should be advanced to early part of the season so that by the time
the vacancies are being suppiied, the prunings left in the field will not be a hindrance.     It
is not advisable to delay the operation 01 infilling until after all the new clearing work is
completed.    Supplies   must 06 put out as early as possible.       In the Western   sector it
should be with the onset of the South-West Monsoon and in the Eastern sector with the
onset of the North-East Monsoon.

It is emphasised that young supplies have to compete for water and nutrients with
surrounding. mature bushes, unlike in clearings where competition is with plants of
comparable age and size. It is essential therefore, that every possible assistance be
given to enhance the establishment and growth of the supplies especially in the case of
single or multiple infills in small patches.

4. Where Not to Infill

    =   Areas with underlying slab rock/hard pan.
    =   Ravines.
    ॥   Water logged areas.

Note: Infilling could be carried out in China jat fields with compatible cultivars.

5. Infilling of Pest and Disease affected areas

   5.1. Eradication of Pest and Disease affected areas: The cause of vacancies
        should be identified before embarking on an infilling program. The vacancies
        caused by nematode infestation, root diseases and up-country live wood termite
        are problems connected with soil. These problems are confined to well defined
        patches and should therefore be identified in time and isolated as blocks by
        demarcation.

   5.2 Such blocks should be rehabilitated with ‘grass after thorough up-rooting.   If
       these infested patches are to be identified after up-rooting, it may at times be
        difficult to do so.

6. Plants used for Infilling

   6.1. Selection of Cultivars for Infilling

        Up-country:      TRI 2025, N2, DT1, K145, TRI 3072, TRI 3073,
                     PK 2 (for Nuwara Eliya), DT 95. CY9, DN
        Mid-country: TRI 2025, DG 7, DG 39,N 2, TRI 4042, TRI 4046.
        Low-country: S 106, DG 7,DG 39, TRI 2025, TRI 2026, TRI 2027, TRI 4042
                     TRI 4049, TRI 4052, TRI 4059, KP 204
   6.2 Size of Plants for Infilling

                   Raise plants in large polythene bags 15 cm (lay flat) x 30 cm
           =       Use well grown healthy plants and not what 15 left over in the nursery after
                   planting the clearings.
           =       The planting of cuttings should be advanced to have plants ready in the
                   planting season. Use around 15 month-old plants in the Up-country, 12-
                   month old plants in the Mid-country and 9-month old plants at low-
                   elevations. The planting of the cuttings should be accordingly advanced to
                   have the plants ready in the planting season

    7.   Preparation of the Field for Infilling

               =    Fork (10 all areas to 06 infilled, with particular emphasis on patches left
                    vacant for sometime, to enhance root growth 01 young plants as well as
                    to remove any pieces of old tea roots.
               =    Vacant areas should be planted with grasses until the field is pruned and
                    infilling commences.
               =    Dig large holes, 30cm in diameter and 60cm in depth.
               =    Adopt appropriate prophylactic measures in eelworm affected areas.
               =    In order [0 avoid cultural and management problems, it is suggested that
                    infills in large blocks in old seedling tea fields be planted along the
                    existing rows except when replanting is envisaged in the near future.
               =    It may be advisable to prune the adjoining bushes slightly lower (18"), 19
                    ensure early establishment of infills.

    8.   Aftercare

               =    71116 infills should be protected by pegging, or with a small basket so that
                    workers do not trample the plants while doing other cultural operations.
               =    Bringing into bearing should be practiced at the correct time.
               =    The side branches of adjacent bushes should be cut in order to permit
                    sufficient light to reach the young supplies.
               =    Fertilizer should be applied as for young VP tea plants.
               =    The area should be kept weed free and thatched with an organic mulch.
                    Avoid use of herbicides infilled patches up to the first prune.

The Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka
Talawakelle

Copyright — The Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka © 2003

                                            COPYRIGHT

All rights reserved.     No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any
form or by any means,         electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or
information storage and retrieval, without permission in writing from the Director,          The
Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka.
