                      T.R.l.        ADVISORY                    CIRCULAR                             No.SP9 |




Issued in: May 2009                                                                        Serial No. 03/09

                                  SAMPLING FOR FOLIAR ANALYSIS OF TEA
          (This Circular cancels Advisory Circular No. F7 Serial No. 7/92 issued in August 1992)

1. Introduction
   Plant growth is dependent on the nature of the medium in which they grow as well as on other agro-
   climatic factors. They extract their nutrient requirements from the soil and for healthy growth, the
   important nutrients should be freely available in the right proportions. Either a deficiency or an
   excess of any one or more of the nutrients can have a profound influence on the healthy growth of
   the plant. A nutrient deficiency or excess will in the first instance, show up in the foliage of the plants
   as distinct and characteristic symptoms.       Chemical analysis of the foliage of the plants would,
   therefore, serve to confirm the visual observations and also give a reasonably good index of their
   nutrient status.

   11 tea growers strictly follow the fertilizer recommendations of the Tea Research Institute of Sri
   Lanka, the need for routine analysis would not arise. Foliar analysis is, however, recommended in
   instances where growth abnormalities are suspected 10 be due to nutritional problems.

2. Leaf sampling
   For most leaf analysis, it is the first mature leaf (Figure 1) that is collected and it is from the axil of
   this leaf that the pluckable shoot emerges. This is usually found on the plucking table, whilst those
   below, and consequently shaded should be avoided.
   1. When sampling an experimental plot, one or two leaves are taken from each bush in the plot to
         provide a composite sample of about 100 leaves
   2. When      sampling is carried out on a field scale, a large number of widely distributed bushes
         should be sampled, taking one leaf from each bush
   3. In order to get a representative sample, it is preferable to randomly select bushes from different
         rows
   4.    Bushes growing in abnormal areas such as close to roads and drains and those in bare patches
         should be avoided
   5.    It is best to avoid collecting leaf samples following a period of prolonged heavy rainfall or during
         extreme droughts

3. Sampling and packing procedure of leaf samples
    1.   Leaf sampling should be avoided in the early part of first year and the latter part of final year of
         the pruning cycle. Under low country conditions where certain fields are maintained on a 2 year
         cycle, sampling should be done in the 2nd half 01 first year or 1% half 01 2 year
    2. Itis absolutely essential to note that sampling should be done only after a minimum period 016
       weeks following the last ground application 01 fertilizer
    3. From each block of 2 ha, collect about 100 leaves at random selecting only the first mature leaf
         at the plucking table (Figure 1)
    4.   Do not collect more than one leaf per bush
                                                     ~~~       First leaf
           Second leaf                                     <4—Flush


                                                                              Third leaf



           Fish leaf ~~~?




                                                                      ඬ්‌         First mature leaf




Figure 1. Diagrammatic sketch of shoot showing leaf to be sampled


   5.   Pack the samples in polythene bags
   6.   Label each sample    clearly and ensure   that the label is not in contact with the sample.   This
        precaution is taken to avoid the labels becoming illegible at the time of arrival at the TRI
        laboratories or its centres. The labels should contain details of the field and the block number,
        seedling or VP tea, year of last prune, length of the pruning cycle and the date of the last
        fertilizer application

4. Sample despatch
   The samples should be sent directly to the Head, Soils and Plant Nutrition Division, Tea Research
   Institute of Sri Lanka, Talawakelle or to the regional laboratories located at following addresses
   depending on the convinience for transport.
   *    Soils and Plant Nutrition Laboratory, Walahanduwa,    Galle
   *    Soils and Plant Nutrition Laboratory, Research, Advisory and Extension Centre, PO Box,        130,
        Hantana,   Kandy


   Itis necessary that the total cost of analysis should be paid prior to commencing analysis. Payments
   could be made through cheques, postal or money orders drawn in favour of “Tea Research Institute
   of Sri Lanka” and forward to the Head, Soils and Plant Nutrition Division, Tea Research Institute of
   Sri Lanka, Talawakelle or to the regional laboratories located at Hantana, Kandy and Walahanduwa,
   Galle. Money could also be paid at the cash counter of the Tea Research Institute or its centres at
   the time of submission of samples for analysis.


                                              COPYRIGHT

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or information storage and retrieval,
without permission in writing from the Director, Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka.
