                                         ADVISORY                    CIRCULAR                                 No.PTEH

  Issued in: September 2003                                                                         Serial No. 18/03


                            CALIBRATION OF INFRA-RED                 MOISTURE    METER

                       (This Advisory Circular replaces Circular No. T6, Serial No.1/81)

 The internationally accepted standard method of moisture determination of tea is the oven
 method. A weighed sample of tea is kept in an oven controlled at 103 4: 2°C for a minimum of
 four hours and is weighed again. The difference in weight is the weight of moisture in the
 sample and this is quoted as a percentage of the original weight. This method though accurate
 is time-consuming and is not suitable for routine use in tea factories.

 There     are   several   types   of moisture     meters,   which    give   a quick     reading,    but   with   lower
 accuracy.       These instruments, however,       are suitable for routine use.       One such instrument is the
 Infra-red Moisture Meter. In this instrument, the moisture in the tea sample is driven off by the
 heat from the infra-red lamp. Initially, only the moisture is driven off but subsequently the tea is
 burnt. Therefore, the time for which the sample should be dried is critical in order to get a
 reasonably accurate value of the moisture content. It is not correct to dry the sample until such
 time    that traces    of smoke   are   seen,   as this cannot   be observed      accurately.       The   switch-ON
 time, the time for which the sample should be dried, is determined by the calibration procedure
 given below.

 It is advisable to calibrate the moisture meter at the factory itself as the calibration depends on
 the particle size of the tea, power supply, voltage etc.

Procedure for Calibration

 $.        Level the meter using a spirit level.

ණී,        Check the scale at various points using           actual weights.       Slight adjustments         may   be
           necessary using the knob provided.

 3.       Adjust the height 01 the bulb so that tea will just start to burn (smoke) in about 10
          minutes after switching on the bulb and note this position. This will ensure that the
          required switch-on time is well within 10 minutes.

4.         Collect some fired dhools from the drier mouth and divide into two samples. Send one
           sample to the Technology Division of the TRI or to a suitable laboratory for accurate
           determination of the moisture content using the Oven method. This sample should be
           packed in a tin leaving no air space and sealed with adhesive tape.

 5.        Place the standard (usually 10g) quantity of the dhool from the second sample on the
           moisture meter pan.    Switch on the bulb and note the reading every 30 seconds
           commencing from 3 minutes to 10 minutes.

6.         Repeat as in (5) and take the average of the two sets of readings.                  If the readings are
           too different repeat for consistency.
7.     Once the oven-method moisture readings are sent to the estate, read out the time, which
       corresponds to the readings obtained as in (6).       This is the switch-on time to obtain the
       correct moisture reading.

8.     The above time spends on the distance of the bulb from the pan, as such, it should be
       kept constant as determined in (3).

9.     The switch-on time varies with the particle size, therefore the time should be determined
       separately for each dhool and each grade.

10.     The above time also depends on the power supply voltage, therefore, calibration and
       subsequent   use   of the   instrument   should   be carried   out more   or less at the same
       voltage.

The Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka
Talawakelle.

Copyright — The Tea Research Institute 01 Sri Lanka © 2003

                                            COPYRIGHT

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or
by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or information
storage and retrieval without permission in writing from the Director, The Tea Research Institute
of Sri Lanka.
