                     T.R.l. ADVISORY CIRCULAR                                            No. PAEN


 issued in: February 2001                                                        Serial No. 1/01

                            BRINGING YOUNG TEA INTO BEARING

 (This Circular cancels the Circular No. R1, Serial No. 24/71 issued in July 1971.)


 1.        Objectives

The objectives of bringing young tea into bearing is to form a low spreading bush with a dense
canopy that will result in as many plucking points as possible and also enable convenient
harvesting. Accordingly, it aims at modifying the growth of a single-stemmed plant info a multi-
stemmed bush with sturdy branches. This is sometimes referred to as bush formation. To
achieve this goal, the plants should be subjected to minimum stress.

As a result of the formation 01 an early ground cover, a successful bringing into bearing
operation leads to early plucking, retards weed growth and also facilitates soil conservation. It
must, however, be noted that the root growth of young plants can be adversely affected and
easily succumb to drought, if they are brought into bearing very early.

2.     Methods

There are two methods of bringing young tea into bearing. They are cut-across and bending
and pegging. The practice of bending and pegging is discouraged for reasons of frame
debilitation arising from sun scorch, canker and wood rot. The more suitabie method of bringing
young tea into bearing is cut-across, and this 15 also known as centering.

3.     Cut-across (Centering)

       * Plants ars allowed [ට be well established in the field and grow as healthy plants with
          a strong leader and lateral branches, fora period of 9-12 months.

       * 17116 main stem is cut at a height of 20-25 cm from ground level, depending
                                                                                   on the
          branching habit of the cione, leaving as many side branches as possible.

       * After a lapse of about 4-6 months, a second cut is given at a height of 35-40 cm
             across all branches.

       *    Once the plant is adequately regenerated, shoots are tipped at a height of 45-50 cm
            and the mini bush is brought into light plucking.

A sharp knife or a secateur can be used for these operations. While centering is done,
peripheral branches or horizontally growing side shoots should not be removed so that an early
ground cover is established. Dry periods should be avoided for centering to minimize
environmental stress on bud break and subsequent growth of shoots.
The Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka
Talawakelle

Copyright - The Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka © 2001



                                         COPYRIGHT

All rights resetved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or
by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or information
storage and retrieval system without permission in writing from the Director, The Tea Research
Institute of Sri Lanka.
