                       T.R.l.        ADVISORY                   CIRCULAR                           No.PT3

Date of Issue: September 2003                                                                Serial No: 15/03

                            MANUFACTURE OF TEA BY THE CTC PROCESS

  (This Advisory Circular replaces Circular Nos. T3, Serial No. 11/72 and T4, Serial No. 12/72)


A high standard of plucking is important for good CTC manufacture, not only to ensure teas of a
satisfactory liquoring standard, but also to prevent the CTC rollers from becoming prematurely
blunt by cutting into coarse leaf, stalk and woody material.

Withering

Green       leaf is given   a light wither,    corresponding   to about   28-32%   outturn    of made    tea to
withered leaf, in troughs. It is important that the wither should not get harder than an upper limit
of 32% to ensure a satisfactory make, even if a drastic reduction in the duration of wither is
necessary        The withered leaf is then passed over a withered leaf sifter with a No. 4 (or a larger
mesh) to eliminate sand and small stones that may have got picked up accidentally in the field
and in the weighing sheds.

Cutting

The leaf is fed into a pre-conditioner such as 15" (380 mm) rotorvane and then given 3 or more
successive cuts in CTC machines arranged in series. It is advisable to use a bar magnet on the
conveyor to the first CTC machine connected to remove iron particles, which might damage the
rollers. Arrangement sketches, details 01 roller adjustments, rolling programmes etc., are given
in other circulars.

Fermentation

The period of fermentation is generally shorter than with conventional manufacture, ranging
from 1 hour 15 minutes to about 2 hours 10 minutes depending on the rate of fermentation of
the leaf.      Fermentation    machines       with a forced draught   of air could be used,      but it is also
possible to ferment the leaf on tables, by reducing the spread to 25 mm                 - 32 mm      (1 to 1%
inches) in height.  Fermented dhool can then be fed into the drier directly.     It is however,
advisable to pass it first through a ball-breaker as this operation minimizes the formation of
agglomerates which inevitably find their way into the off grades.

Drying

The drying process is carried out in either a Fluid-Bed Drier (FBD) or in a conventional ECP
drier. However, FBD is considered to be sine quo non for CTC manufacture. If FBD is used the
inlet temperature should be maintained at 121 - 126°C and the weir end temperature at 88 -
93°C with a weir height of 8.9 - 10.2 cm. If ECP drier is used the period of drying should be 21
minutes with an inlet temperature of 93 - 99°C and exhaust temperature of 52 - 54°C.

Grading

The grading operation is simplified by the absence of a big bulk, and by the manufacture 01 only
a limited number of grades. Generally, either a Vibro Screen or a Chota Sifter or කූ Trinick Sorter
with mesh sizes of 10, 12, 16, 30 and 40 is used.              When a Chota Sifter or a Vibro Screen is
used, tea particles passing over the 12 mesh are crushed, resifted and classified in secondary
grades. 8121 is taken through 12 and over the 16 mesh. What passes through 16 and over the
30 mesh is PF1 and through 30 and over 40 is PD. What passes through 40 mesh is D1.
Some variation 15 expected in the sieve size description of grades and even in sifting procedure
according     to   trade   requirements,    but     the   procedure     outlined      here   is that    which   is most
commonly followed. Crushed teas, rejects from the winnower (if used for subsequent cleaning
operations) and the electrostatic stalk extractor are used to form the off grades BP1, F1 and F2
and D2.

The trays in a Trinnik sorter should be fixed in an ascending order of perforation sizes (No. 30,
24,16, 12) and grades separated as explained above. For example, BP1 is taken through
No. 12.   Trinnick sorters could be used with only 4 sizes of meshes fitted, if necessary.

Bright infusions with good liquoring colour and strength are necessary attributes of a good CTC
tea, but the dry leaf appearance standard is not as important a factor as with orthodox.


AREAS SUITABLE FOR THE PRODUCTION OF CTC TEA IN SRI LANKA

Increasing    popularity    of the tea bag        in Europe     and   the demand         for quick     brew teas       have
resulted in the formation of a very considerable market for cut/tear/curl (CTC) teas. A negligible
proportion of this type of tea is manufactured in Sri Lanka and it has now become very
necessary for us to take a serious view of this expanding market. Strong, coloury liquors are
essential characteristics, but dry leaf appearance is not as important as sales factor as it is with
teas of orthodox manufacture.

The requirements of this specialized market for CTC tea are, at the moment,                            supplied by India
and East Africa.      CTC tea production in India is based largely in the low elevational districts of
Assam,    Dooars     and   West   Bengal   in the    North    East,   and   in more     limited   quantities,   from    the
plain tea producing areas of Kerala and Madras State in the South.                     Districts such as Darjeeling,
Nilgiris and the Anamalais which produce flavoury teas in season, and high quality teas for most
of the year retain almost exclusively the orthodox system of manufacture. East Africa, on the
other hand, experiences no pronounced flavoury season as in the Uva and Dimbula-Dickoya
districts of Ceylon, and produces mainly the CTC variety.

Looking into the factors which have demarcated CTC producing areas from districts producing
orthodox black teas in other countries, it would seem that estates in the low and low-mid
elevations of Sri Lanka would be those best suited for producing the type of CTC tea that would
find its way into the tea bag. Rush and other off-season teas from high and upper-mid
elevational teas could also be converted into CTC but these estates would then have to be
geared for dual manufacture and the very best of these could even be placed in a
disadvantages position, under prevailing market conditions, by not offering the trade an
uninterrupted supply of a given line of manufacture.

The Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka
Talawakelle

Copyright - The Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka 2003

                                                    COPY RIGHT

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or
by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or information
storage and retrieval, without permission in writing from the Director, The Tea Research Institute
of Sri Lanka.
