           T.R.I. ADVISORY CIRCULAR                                                 No.LUEN
Issued in: September 2003                                                 Serial No: 16/03


                       FIELD CATEGORIZATION IN TEA LANDS

           (This Advisory Circular replaces Circular No. E 1, Serial No. 12/94)

1. Introduction

An estate comprises of numerous fields, often separated from each other by natural
boundaries such as ravines and footpaths or man-made boundaries such as wind belts
and fences. A given field is generally planted in one year and in an extent that can be
handled by one gang of pluckers. Some fields would be high yielding while others may
not be so, and hence the contribution of each field to total estate crop will vary. Records
of crop harvested, workers utilized, fertilizer applied, cultural operations etc., are
maintained individually for each field. This information could be advantageously
exploited for planning a development program, for the estate as a whole by relating
inputs to field productivity.

2. Basis of Categorization

Categorization is based on the performance of each field, which would generally be
dependent on topography, microclimate, soil fertility, any pest and disease incidence,
and any other constraints that may prevail. As crop harvested is the most reliable
indicator of all such factors, the productivity (yield per unit area) potential of each field
can be utilized to categorize them.

In order to even out variations that may exist (weather, inputs, worker efficiency etc) over
successive years, field categorization should be based on the average yield achieved
over the past 2 - 3 pruning cycles. The cycle lengths in all fields on an estate/division
should, as far as possible, be constant.

Generally tea fields on each plantation can be categorized into three equal categories of
“A” “ප්‍ර” and “C”, based on their average annual yields over the past 2-3 pruning cycles.

3. Computation of Yield

In order to arrive at a system of categorization the following steps are necessary:

    3.1. Obtain yield records for the last 2 or 3 completed pruning cycles from the yield
    book. The first year of the cycle refers to the first 12 months since pruning, the
    second year from the 13" to the 24" month and so on.

    3.2. Calculate the mean yield per unit area per year (YPH) of each pruning cycle as
    follows:
         Mean cycle yield (kg /halyear) =     Total productionover the full cycle     x 12
                                              Total Numbr of Months in the cycle
    3.3. Construct a table with 5 columns as follows:




                             CATEGORIZATION OF FIELDS

           (1)               (2)                 (3)           (4)                (5)
     YPH of 1613         Field No.           Extent (ha)   Cumulative         Remarks
     (decreasing                                              Extent         (Age of field
         order )                                               (ha)              etc)




   3.4. To divide the estate into three categories, see which entry in column 4 comes
   closest to 1/3“ the estate extent and draw a horizontal line entry across the table. All
   fields above this line will fall into “A” Category. Similarly, separate out “B” and “C”"
   categories by drawing a horizontal line across the table below the entry where the
   entry in column 4 is closest to 2/3" of the total extent.

   3.5 After categorizing the fields as above, it is necessary to undertake කූ thorough
   study of each field and shift any field, either up or down, based on whether they have
   undergone any significant changes which merit such a shift (including extreme
   weather periods, amalgamation of fields, crop etc).

   3.6 Field categorization may also be undertaken for each division of the estate
   separately if there are distinct differences in cycle lengths due to differences in
   elevation.

   3.7 Where there is කූ significant proportion of VP tea, then VP tea and old seedling
   tea could be advantageously categorized separately, as their cycle lengths would
   be invariably different from each other.

4. Features of the different categories

   4.1    “A” Category Fields: These would be the best one-third of the fields 01] the
   given plantation, and would have best stand of tea. Most of the VP tea will be
   included in this category based on the assumption that their potential yield 15 high.
   For some years (ට come, the plantation has to depend on this category of tea as the
   bulk of the crop is obtained from these fields. All the inputs should be given without
   restrictions. The vacancies must be infilled after each prune, to maintain such tea in
   good condition. Such lands will not be replanted for a long time to come.

   4.2. “B” Category Fields: The yield would be relatively poorer than "A" category.
   Replanting/infilling could commence in the lowest yielding fields in this category,
   provided there are no soil limitations.
   4.3 “C” Category Fields: These fields would consist of the poorest one-third of the
   tea 01] the plantation. These fields could be earmarked for diversification if they are
   poor. Where there are no major limitations, this category could be replanted/infilled.
   Other fields where lands are steep and soils are eroded, can be diversified away
   from tea.

5. Advantages of Categorization

The main benefit is the prioritization of funds into productive fields, particularly when
funds are limited, to obtain maximum returns from limited resources. When fertilizer is in
short supply, or curtailment of expenditure is necessitated due to budgetary constraints,
we could optimize inputs in better fields to attain maximum benefits, and restrict them to
relatively poor fields rather than impose බූ standard cut all round. In a manner similar to
the restriction 01 inputs, priorities could also be more clearly laid down for efficient and
cost-effective worker utilization for various cultural operations.

Categorization 15 most useful in maintaining the estate production uniformly from one
year to other. In order to achieve this objective, it is essential to prune equal extents in
each of the categories, say, on a 4 year cycle, one would prune a fourth of each
category.
For replanting, a long term program could be prepared to replace the tea in fields at the
bottom of “B” category as well as those බූ! the top of “C” category, where there are no
major limitations. A critical examination must be undertaken on each selected field to
determine the cause for low yields. Replanting should be considered only if soil
conditions are suitable, without much erosion.

It 15 only natural that there are deaths in tea fields from time 10 time and if not replaced
according to a regular program of infilling, then productivity of such fields will decline
steadily. Infilling should commence with the “A” category fields, consisting of all VP tea
and the best seedling tea, and thereafter the better “B” category fields. The poorer “B”
category fields, if they are to be retained for some years to come, may be infilled if funds
and material availability permit. Infilling generally would not be desirable in lower “C”
category fields as soil conditions may be too poor for good growth of infiils.

6. Conclusion

Categorization is a dynamic system as it depends on the development of fields relative
to one another in a given estate. When a replanted field comes into bearing, it gets into
the “A” category, thereby pushing the lowest “A” category field into “පි” category and the
lowest “B” category field into “ට” category. So, some 01 the marginal tea lands low down
in the “C”" category could be considered for diversification away from tea. These two
instances would alter the category of some fields, indicating that categorization is not a
once-and for-all exercise and has to be reviewed/revised periodically.

The Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka
Talawakelle
Copyright — The Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka © 2003


                                       COPY RIGHT

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or
information storage and retrieval, without permission in writing from the Director, The
Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka.
