                                ADVISORY CIRCULAR                                               No.SP
                                                                                                    8 |




Issued in: May 2009                                                                     Serial No. 02/09


                                   AnALYsIS OF FERTILIZER SAMPLES
         (This Circular cancels Advisory Circular No. /~6, Serial No. 6/92, issued in August 1992)


1. Introduction
  The Institute undertakes analysis 01 fertilizer samples to determine their nutrient contents for ensuring
  quality. The values so obtained may differ from those expected of their chemical composition for
  the following reasons:
  1. Adulteration
  2. Presence of excess moisture. Straight fertilizers or fertilizer mixtures which are hygroscopic or
      contain hygroscopic components, could absorb moisture and become a slurry, if stored under
      humid conditions
  3. Inadequate mixing of the components of a fertilizer mixture
  4. Segregation of particles of different sizes in the bag containing the mixture during transport and
      storage
  5. Presence of impurities
     . Incorrect sampling procedure
 o




  7. Analytical errors. This is relatively small


  For the results 01 analysis to be meaningful, it is necessary that great care be taken when sampling
  is carried out. It is only then the samples would be representative of the bulk of the fertilizer or
  fertilizer-mixture sampled. Thus, it is important that the following procedure be strictly adhered to in
  sampling.

2. Sampling
  The number 01 fertilizer bags to be collected at random for sampling should be determined based
  on the amount of fertilizer bags in a given store as per Table 1.

  Table 1. Guide to determine the number of bags to be sampled

  Stock of fertilizer                    Percentage of the minimum number             Number of bags
                                              of bags taken for sampling

  Less than 2 bags                                         100                       sample both bags
  2-5 bags                                                  60                                  2
  6-10 bags                                                 40                                  3
   11-20 bags                                               20                                  3
  21-60 bags                                                  5                                 2
  61-200 bags                                                 4                                 3
  201-500 bags                                                3                                 8
  501-1000 bags                                               2                                13
   1001 or more bags                                          1                               20
  The accepted procedure for obtaining a representative sample of fertilizer is described below.

3. Methods of sampling

   3.1 Use of a shovel
   The bags to be sampled should be selected at random and should be emptied separately on a clean
   dry surface and blended using a shovel and one shovelful taken from each. The shovelfuls so
   taken should be then thoroughly mixed and any lumps broken up. From this mixture, a sub sample
   should be drawn by the process of quartering.

   3.2 Use of a sampling probe
        1. Use a sampling probe (details given below) to draw samples from fertilizer bags
        2. Lay bags horizontally, open one end and pass the probe diagonally from one end to the other
           and remove the core
        3. From lots of ten bags, take one core from each bag
        4. For lots of more than ten bags, select ten bags at random and then take one core from each
           bag
        5. When it is necessary to sample only lots of less than ten bags, take ten cores but at least one
           core from each of the bags
        6. For bulk fertilizer, draw at least ten cores from different points
        7. From this, subsamples should be drawn by the process of quartering as described below


        The sampling probe could be constructed by taking 0.9 m (3 feet) long 5 cm (2 inches) internal
        diameter conduit piping or PVC tubing. Cut one end of the tubing obliquely to get a sharp
        pointed edge (Figure 1).


                                                   5cm                                                 )

                            09%
                               (8)                            රැසේ                  ®

Figure 1. A diagramatic sketch of a sampling probe (a) and a shovel (b)

4. Subsampling by the process of quartering
   Itis required to reduce the quantity of fertilizer to a manageable size prior to submission for analysis.
   Therefore quartering should be adopted as explained below to subsample the collected fertilizer
   (Figure 2).
   a. Heap the fertilizer to form a ‘cone’ on ඛූ clean sheet of paper or polythene
   b. Flatten the cone and divide into two sections through the centre with a metal spatula or wooden
        plank
        Divide each half once more and separate the four quarters into four separate piles or quarters
 ~oao




        Reject one set of diagonally opposite quarters and mix the remainder
     . Continue the quartering and rejection until the desired quantity of sub sample is obtained
        Collect the final remainder as representative sub sample


   One kilogram of sub sample is quite sufficient, of which only one-third need be sent for nutrient
   analysis, one-third should be sent to the supplier and the balance must be retained by the customer.

                                                      2
Figure 2. Subsampling by quartering


5. Labelling
  The samples should be carefully and correctly labelled giving the name 01 the estate, type of
  fertilizer and the date on which the samples was taken. It must be ensured that the label does not
  come into contact with the fertilizer sample. This precaution is taken to avoid the labels becoming
   illegible at the time of arrival at the TRI laboratories or its centres.


6. Sample despatch
  The samples should be sent directly to the Head, Soils and Plant Nutrition Division, Tea Research
   Institute of Sri Lanka, Talawakelle or to the regional laboratories located at following addresses
  depending on convenience for transport.
   *   Soils and Plant Nutrition Laboratory, Walahanduwa, Galle
   *   Soils and Plant Nutrition Laboratory, Research, Advisory and Extension Centre, PO Box, 130,
       Hantana, Kandy


   Itis necessary that the total cost 01 analysis should be paid prior to commencing analysis. Payments
   could be made through cheques, postal or money orders drawn in favour of “Tea Research Institute
   of Sri Lanka” and forward to the Head, Soils and Plant Nutrition Division, Tea Research Institute of
   Sri Lanka, Talawakelle or to the regional laboratories at Hantana, Kandy and Walahanduwa, Galle.
   Money could also be paid at the cash counter of the Tea Research Institute or its centres at the time
   of submission of samples for analysis.

   The analysis is being done on the strict understanding that neither the Tea Research Board nor the
   Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka will be involved in any litigation, nor will any officers employed
   by the above Board or any of its Divisions or its centres be required to answer summons to witness
   in any legal action or dispute arising from the results of this or any other analysis of these or similar
   samples.

                                               COPYRIGHT


All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or information storage and retrieval,
without permission in writing from the Director, Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka.
