               T.R.l.       ADVISORY                  CIRCULAR                         No.HP |El


Issued in: September 2003                                                  Serial No: 17/03


                       CULTIVATION OF TEA SOILS - FORKING

            (This Advisory Circular replaces Circular No. S 1, Serial No. 5/71)

1. Introduction

The continuous growing of a single crop causes deterioration of soil physical properties.
This may be at a maximum in a tea field with a poor bush density. The soil surface
between tea rows are subjected to continual treading due to the movement of workers
to harvest crop as well as to perform other cultural operations. This treading creates
compaction of the surface layer, which in turn impedes the entry of rainwater causing
run-off of most of the rain falling on the surface. The entry of air through the surface
pores is also restricted thereby, causing a deficit of oxygen, that is most necessary for
vigorous root growth. When infiltration of rainwater is low and run-off is high, the fertilizer
applied will be washed away with the run-off water, thus causing wastage of costly
fertilizer.

2. Method of Soil Cultivation

To break (10 such compaction and aerate the soil, the type of soil cuitivation
recommended is termed “forking". The objective of forking is to ensure deep cultivation
of soil in බූ mild degree.

Forking could be carried out in the inter-row spaces both in VP and Seedling tea. In the
case of seedling fields which is planted up and down the slope, forking could be carried
out in ඛූ staggered manner.

While forking, the soil is opened up, at the center of the inter-row space, without turning
over the clod and with minimum of disturbance to the feeder roots. Deep forking is
undertaken with a garden fork having 3-4 tines, 38-45 cm long, which is forced in to the
ground at a nearly vertical angle up to a depth of 38-45 cm. The handle of the fork is
then pushed forward so as to open up a pocket behind the tines. The fork is then
withdrawn when the operation is called “plain forking”; or else the ground litter, green
manure loppings and such other materials (compost, well decomposed tea waste etc)
are pushed into the pocket created, in which case it is called “envelope forking®. 11115
operation is repeated at intervals of about 22-30 cm apart.

3. Forking in Relation to Weather

Forking during prolonged dry weather should be avoided. When forking is carried out in
such dry periods, the soil surface is exposed to wind and sun resulting in increased
evaporation of soil water. It is also advisable to avoid forking during heavy rains, as 50115
of unstable crumb structure tend to puddle very readily.
4. Frequency and Time of Forking

       4.1 Frequency of Forking: It is recommended that forking be carried out only
       once a cycle in the up and mid-country, and once in two cycles in the low-
       country. However, where low-country tea soils are known to be clayey and
       compacted, the flexibility to fork once a cycle may be allowed.

       4.2 Time of Forking: Though forking is normally done after pruning, the best
       time to undertake when there is sufficient new foliage on the bush and adequate
       soil moisture, and this would be around tipping time.

       Forking could also be spread over two intervals, when alternate rows are forked
       each time. The first round may be undertaken as described above, while the
       second round may be given mid-cycle, but at the latter time there would be
       insufficient space between two rows for comfortable worker movement.

5. Economics of Forking

The benefits of improving soil physical properties and water percolation into the soil
through forking cannot always be calculated in physical terms, but it could be assumed
to reflect in the yield. Recent research indicated that, over a 4-year cycle, forking can
give a net incremental yield of about 20%, compared to the control. This analysis, whilst
indicating the profitability of the operation of forking should not be taken out of context
and generalized. Research data is applicable only to the specific set of conditions (slope,
soil, rainfall and microclimate) operating in a given field yet could be taken to serve as an
indicator of the economic advantages that could accrue through forking.

The Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka
Talawakelle

Copyright — The Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka © 2003

                                       COPYRIGHT

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or
information storage and retrieval, without permission in writing from the Director, The
Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka.
