                       T.R.l.        ADVISORY                    CIRCULAR                           No.HP [}


Issued in: June 2013                                                                  Serial No.02/2013




                                          REJUVENATION PRUNING

                        (This replaces the Circular No. P 2 Serial No. 13/92)



The removal of the inhibitory effects of old age and the restoration of the vigour of the young is
rejuvenation. Sections of the ageing old tea fields become weakened to a state of being no longer able to

withstand the rigours of normal cultivation and the adverse impacts 01 the environment, including the

changes of the weather as well as that 01 the attack by pests and diseases. Such ill effects lead to:


1.   Poor or non- recovery from prune and eventual death of bushes, with resulting vacancies

2.   Anincrease in the existence of economically non-viable "passenger" tea bushes

3.   Increased susceptibility to pests and diseases affecting the frame and roots


Objectives

The overall rejuvenation programme aims at arresting the decline outlined above and to restore, at least

in part, the vigour of the afflicted sections of the field by rejuvenation pruning as well as by infilling, to

help bring back the field to a state of being economically viable. The indiscriminate            uprooting of

deep-rooted old seedling tea bushes for purposes of large scale replanting, lead to enormous amounts of

soil disturbance and losses, especially on sloping terrain. In order to avert such disturbances and losses on

such sloping terrain, the fields in these locations could possibly be taken themselves to rejuvenation

pruning and consolidation by infilling.



Fields with potential for rejuvenation
Fields that are marginal and non-retrievable to a state of economic viability as well as fields that are
earmarked for replanting within the next ten years, should be left out. The selection criteria for the

remaining fields are based on the following:
1.   There should not be a widespread incidence of root disease such as Poria or root pests such as
     heavy incidence of plant parasitic nematodes or the up- country live-wood tea termites

     The collar/base of the bushes to be renovated should not be debilitated

     At least 50% of the stand should be taken themselves to rejuvenation pruning
     There should be a good depth of soil with the absence of surface gravel or rocks and boulders



Preparation of the selected field

1.     Thefield should be fully rested for a period not less than six months.

2.     Aminimum of two fertilizer applications should be given during the rest phase bush by

bush, providing the equivalent of 60 kg N per ha per application from the recommended
mixture.

Itis preferable to give a quantity of about 6 to 8 metric tons of well decomposed compost

(a mixture of well decomposed refuse tea and any other suitable green matter)       per hectare.

The rejuvenation pruning should be carried out with the onset of the wet weather (Western
Sector - S.W. monsoon and Eastern Sector - N.E. monsoon). The pruned litter (brushwood)

should be immediately buried in shallow trenches (20 to 30 cm depth), cut in alternate

contour rows.
The cut surfaces and shaved off wounds on the stumps should be painted over with a

recommended wound-dressing. Please refer Advisory Circular Nos. PU2 and PU4 and on

chemical control of diseases and chemical control of insect, mite and nematode pests

respectively.

Dolomitic limestone is recommended to be applied at the rate of about 1 to 2.5 metric

tons/ha (depending on soil acidity) prior to pruning (please refer Advisory Circular No. SP 3

on Fertilizer recommendations for mature tea)

In areas prone to Blister Blight leaf disease, special care should be taken to prevent the

 outbreaks on the recovering shoots, by strictly adhering to the recommendations given in

Advisory Circulars No. DM 1 and PU 2 on protection of tea from blister blight and Chemical

 control of diseases respectively.
8.        During recovery of the pruned field, a concerted infilling programme needs to be carried
          out with specifically grown 18-month-old nursery plants of the appropriate cultivars
          raised in jumbo polythene sleeves.

9.        Infilling should commence soon after pruning, within the monsoon that immediately
          follows the prune. Infilling 01 casualties may continue during the following monsoon as well. The

          plants for infilling should be raised well on time by proper programming. The infilling programme

          of the rejuvenated field should aim at a target bush population of at least 8000 bushes per ha.

10.       Tipping should be done at a height of about 60 cm (24 inches) from ground level with
          the main objective of developing thick and healthy pruning frames.



The Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka , Talawakelle


Copyright - The Tea Research Institute of Sri Lanka (ට 2013


                                               COPYRIGHT

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or information
storage    and   retrieval system    without permission       in writing from   the Director,    The   Tea
Research Institute of Sri Lanka.
